<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1 plus MathML 2.0//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/Math/DTD/mathml2/xhtml-math11-f.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta charset="utf-8"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../style.css"/><script src="../permalink.js"/><script src="../navigation.js"/><title>Well-specified Common Lisp — APPLYHOOK-ENVIRONMENT</title></head><body><main><nav class="sidebar"><span class="name">Entry Points</span><br/><ol><li><a href="../chap-0.xhtml#section-Figures">Table of Contents</a></li><li><a href="../symbol-index.xhtml#section-SymbolIndex">Symbol Index</a></li><li><a href="../figure-index.xhtml#section-FigureIndex">Figure Index</a></li><li><a href="../issue-index.xhtml#section-IssueIndices">Issue Index</a></li><li><a href="../note-indices.xhtml#section-ReviewerNoteIndex">Note Indices</a></li><li><a href="../chapter-26.xhtml#section-Glossary">Glossary</a></li></ol><hr/><span class="name">APPLYHOOK-ENVIRONMENT</span><br/><ol class="local-toc"><li><a href="#section-Status">Status</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-References">References</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Edit history">Edit history</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Problem description">Problem description</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#issue-applyhook-environment:remove-env">Proposal REMOVE-ENV</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Rationale">Rationale</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Current practice">Current practice</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Cost to Implementors">Cost to Implementors</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Cost to Users">Cost to Users</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Cost of non-adoption">Cost of non-adoption</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Performance impact">Performance impact</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Benefits">Benefits</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Esthetics">Esthetics</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Discussion">Discussion</a><ol> </ol></li></ol></nav><div class="content"><h1>X3J13 Issue APPLYHOOK-ENVIRONMENT [Cleanup] [CHANGE]</h1><section id="section-Status" class="status-passed section"><h2 class="section-title">Status</h2>Passed, Jan 89 X3J13 </section><section id="section-References" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">References</h2>APPLYHOOK (CLtL p. 323) </section><section id="section-Edit history" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Edit history</h2>Masinter,  6-Jan-89, Version 1 Masinter, 10-Jan-89, Version 2 </section><section id="section-Problem description" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Problem description</h2>The function APPLYHOOK is documented to take an optional environment argument. CLtL says "Furthermore, the env argument is used as the lexical environment for the operation; env defaults to the null environment."  <br/>However, there is no way that the lexical environment can effect the way in which APPLYHOOK processes its arguments; it merely calls the specified function, and function call is not affected by lexical environments. (The "function" argument to APPLYHOOK is a function object.) <br/>This has been regularly a source of confusion for programmers encountering APPLYHOOK. <br/>The comments also apply to functions bound to *APPLYHOOK*, i.e., under the description of *APPLYHOOK* on p.322, the following <br/>"The <a class="glossary-reference" href="../chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-non-nil">non-nil</a> value of *APPLYHOOK* should be a function that takes three arguments, a function, a list of arguments and an environment..." <br/></section><section class="status-passed proposal" id="issue-applyhook-environment:remove-env"><h2 class="section-title">Proposal REMOVE-ENV</h2>Remove the optional "ENV" argument to APPLYHOOK. Specify that the <a class="glossary-reference" href="../chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-non-nil">non-nil</a> value of *APPLYHOOK* should be a function that takes two arguments, a function and a list of arguments. <br/></section><section id="section-Rationale" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Rationale</h2>Removes a very minor wart. <br/></section><section id="section-Current practice" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Current practice</h2>Most implementations accept an extra argument and then ignore it. <br/></section><section id="section-Cost to Implementors" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Cost to Implementors</h2>Remove optional ENV argument from APPLYHOOK and any code that passes one to APPLYHOOK. <br/></section><section id="section-Cost to Users" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Cost to Users</h2>Remove any ENV argument passed to APPLYHOOK. Fix any *APPLYHOOK*  functions to only take two arguments (or to make the third argument optional.) <br/></section><section id="section-Cost of non-adoption" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Cost of non-adoption</h2>Continued confusion. <br/></section><section id="section-Performance impact" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Performance impact</h2>None <br/></section><section id="section-Benefits" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Benefits</h2>Removes a wart. <br/></section><section id="section-Esthetics" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Esthetics</h2>Minor improvement. <br/></section><section id="section-Discussion" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Discussion</h2>This was discussed on the Common Lisp mailing list several years ago, but slipped through the cracks. </section></div></main><footer>Copyright © 2021 Jan Moringen</footer></body></html>