<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1 plus MathML 2.0//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/Math/DTD/mathml2/xhtml-math11-f.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta charset="utf-8"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../style.css"/><script src="../permalink.js"/><script src="../navigation.js"/><title>Well-specified Common Lisp — STANDARD-REPERTOIRE-GRATUITOUS</title></head><body><main><nav class="sidebar"><span class="name">Entry Points</span><br/><ol><li><a href="../chap-0.xhtml#section-Figures">Table of Contents</a></li><li><a href="../symbol-index.xhtml#section-SymbolIndex">Symbol Index</a></li><li><a href="../figure-index.xhtml#section-FigureIndex">Figure Index</a></li><li><a href="../issue-index.xhtml#section-IssueIndices">Issue Index</a></li><li><a href="../note-indices.xhtml#section-ReviewerNoteIndex">Note Indices</a></li><li><a href="../chapter-26.xhtml#section-Glossary">Glossary</a></li></ol><hr/><span class="name">STANDARD-REPERTOIRE-GRATUITOUS</span><br/><ol class="local-toc"><li><a href="#section-References">References</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Edit history">Edit history</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Problem Description">Problem Description</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#issue-standard-repertoire-gratuitous:rename">Proposal RENAME</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Rationale">Rationale</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Current Practice">Current Practice</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Cost to Implementors">Cost to Implementors</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Cost to Users">Cost to Users</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Benefits">Benefits</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Discussion">Discussion</a><ol> </ol></li></ol></nav><div class="content"><h1>X3J13 Issue STANDARD-REPERTOIRE-GRATUITOUS [Cleanup] [Change]</h1><section id="section-References" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">References</h2>Character Committee Report, 7/25/89, Proposals 2.2.1 and 2.4.3 </section><section id="section-Edit history" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Edit history</h2>Version 1, 1/3/90 by Kim A. Barrett </section><section id="section-Problem Description" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Problem Description</h2>  The Character Committee Report Proposal 2.2.1 <code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">passed</span> <span class="syntax-number">3/89</span>)</span>
</span></code> requires   implementations to support and document a <a class="symbol-reference" href="../chapter-7.xhtml#symbol-standard">standard</a> character subrepertoire,   whose elements are the specified set of characters.  This set of characters   corresponds exactly to those characters which are of type <a class="type-reference" href="../chapter-13.xhtml#type-standard-char">standard-char</a>. <br/>  The Character Committee Report Proposal 2.4.3 <code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">passed</span> <span class="syntax-number">6/89</span>)</span>
</span></code> states that   every character repertoire name is a type specifier. <br/>  Thus we have two atomic type specifiers for precisely the same thing.  The   type <a class="symbol-reference" href="../chapter-7.xhtml#symbol-standard">standard</a> is equivelent to the type <a class="type-reference" href="../chapter-13.xhtml#type-standard-char">standard-char</a>. <br/></section><section class="status-unknown proposal" id="issue-standard-repertoire-gratuitous:rename"><h2 class="section-title">Proposal RENAME</h2>  Change the name of the <a class="symbol-reference" href="../chapter-7.xhtml#symbol-standard">standard</a> character subrepertoire required by   Character Proposal 2.2.1 to be <a class="type-reference" href="../chapter-13.xhtml#type-standard-char">standard-char</a>. <br/></section><section id="section-Rationale" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Rationale</h2>  This removes the duplication. <br/></section><section id="section-Current Practice" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Current Practice</h2>  Probably none. <br/></section><section id="section-Cost to Implementors" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Cost to Implementors</h2>  Probably none. <br/></section><section id="section-Cost to Users" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Cost to Users</h2>  Probably none. <br/></section><section id="section-Benefits" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Benefits</h2>  Eliminates possible confusion when a person reading some code sees     <code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="../chapter-4.xhtml#function-typep">typep</a> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">foo</span> <span class="syntax-quote">'<a class="symbol-reference" href="../chapter-7.xhtml#symbol-standard">standard</a></span>)</span>
</span></code>   and wonders "<a class="symbol-reference" href="../chapter-7.xhtml#symbol-standard">standard</a> what?  Transmission?" <br/></section><section id="section-Discussion" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Discussion</h2>  Pitman and Barrett support this proposal <code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">RENAME</span>)</span>
</span></code>. <br/>  There was initally some concern that <a class="type-reference" href="../chapter-13.xhtml#type-standard-char">standard-char</a> might not be a valid   repertoire name, but there are no restrictions placed on the names of   repertoires in any of the proposals in the Character Committee Report   dated 7/25/89.  There is a footnote (#15) that constrains character   scripts and labels to only use Latin capitals A-Z, hyphen, and digits   0-9, which the name <a class="type-reference" href="../chapter-13.xhtml#type-standard-char">standard-char</a> satisfies.  Since this is a footnote,   it can be argued that it has no force anyway. <br/>  Unfortunately, this still doesn't remove <a class="symbol-reference" href="../chapter-7.xhtml#symbol-standard">standard</a> as a defined name   (i.e., exported symbol of the cl package) since it's used by CLOS for   what might be argued to be an equally ungeneric purpose.  There's a    fair chance that somebody somewhere along the line is going to get    annoyed by the inter-package sharing that occurs due to this symbol   being present. <br/>&mdash;&ndash; Additional comments on the write-up: <br/>Moon (9 Jan 90): <br/>  I support this.  I think it's only an accident of the process for   amending the character committee's proposals that the duplication   between <a class="symbol-reference" href="../chapter-7.xhtml#symbol-standard">standard</a> and <a class="type-reference" href="../chapter-13.xhtml#type-standard-char">standard-char</a> was overlooked.  Given that we   want to get rid of one of the two duplicate names, it's clear   that <a class="type-reference" href="../chapter-13.xhtml#type-standard-char">standard-char</a> is a better name. </section></div></main><footer>Copyright © 2021 Jan Moringen</footer></body></html>