<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1 plus MathML 2.0//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/Math/DTD/mathml2/xhtml-math11-f.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta charset="utf-8"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../style.css"/><script src="../permalink.js"/><script src="../navigation.js"/><title>Well-specified Common Lisp — UNSOLICITED-MESSAGES</title></head><body><main><nav class="sidebar"><span class="name">Entry Points</span><br/><ol><li><a href="../chap-0.xhtml#section-Figures">Table of Contents</a></li><li><a href="../symbol-index.xhtml#section-SymbolIndex">Symbol Index</a></li><li><a href="../figure-index.xhtml#section-FigureIndex">Figure Index</a></li><li><a href="../issue-index.xhtml#section-IssueIndices">Issue Index</a></li><li><a href="../note-indices.xhtml#section-ReviewerNoteIndex">Note Indices</a></li><li><a href="../chapter-26.xhtml#section-Glossary">Glossary</a></li></ol><hr/><span class="name">UNSOLICITED-MESSAGES</span><br/><ol class="local-toc"><li><a href="#section-References">References</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Edit history">Edit history</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Problem description">Problem description</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#issue-unsolicited-messages:not-to-system-user-streams">Proposal NOT-TO-SYSTEM-USER-STREAMS</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Rationale">Rationale</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Current Practice">Current Practice</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Adoption Cost">Adoption Cost</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Benefits">Benefits</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Conversion Cost">Conversion Cost</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Aesthetics">Aesthetics</a><ol> </ol></li></ol></nav><div class="content"><h1>X3J13 Issue UNSOLICITED-MESSAGES [NIL] [Clarification]</h1><section id="section-References" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">References</h2>Chapter 1, Section 1.5, Working draft of standard </section><section id="section-Edit history" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Edit history</h2>8-JAN-89, Version 1 by Masinter 6-FEB-89, Version 2 by Chapman 10-MAR-89, Version 3 by Chapman (added discussion) 21-MAR-89, Version 4 by Chapman  24-MAR-89, Version 5 by Chapman  6-APR-89, Version 6 by Chapman (added amendment from 3/89 mtg) </section><section id="section-Problem description" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Problem description</h2>Is it legal for an implementation to produce unsolicited output, e.g., GC notifications, autoload heralds, and progress messages from <a class="function-reference" href="../chapter-24.xhtml#function-compile-file">compile-file</a> or <a class="function-reference" href="../chapter-24.xhtml#function-load">load</a>? <br/></section><section class="status-unknown proposal" id="issue-unsolicited-messages:not-to-system-user-streams"><h2 class="section-title">Proposal NOT-TO-SYSTEM-USER-STREAMS</h2>No output may be produced by functions other than that specified in the standard or due to the signalling of conditions detected by the function. <br/>  Unsolicited output, such as GC notifications and autoload heralds, should not go directly to the stream held by any Common Lisp stream variable but can go indirectly to <a class="variable-reference" href="../chapter-21.xhtml#variable-*terminal-io*">*terminal-io*</a> by using a synonym stream to that variable. <br/>Output such as progress reports from <a class="function-reference" href="../chapter-24.xhtml#function-load">load</a> and <a class="function-reference" href="../chapter-3.xhtml#function-compile">compile</a> are "solicited", and are not covered by this issue. See <span class="issue-reference error">issue:Issue COMPILE-AND-LOAD-VERBOSE</span>. <br/>  <br/></section><section id="section-Rationale" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Rationale</h2>The intent of the proposal is stated informally as follows: if a file is written to, no implementation-generated output should end up in the file except as stated above. <br/>The intent of paragraph 2 of the proposal is that  implementations are forced to make such streams possible to redirect without redirecting the Common Lisp stream itself. <br/></section><section id="section-Current Practice" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Current Practice</h2></section><section id="section-Adoption Cost" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Adoption Cost</h2>Small. Implementations and their documentation may have to change slightly. <br/></section><section id="section-Benefits" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Benefits</h2>Portability. This proposal has very little impact on implementations, but helps the user by explicitly stating the disposition of unsolicited output. <br/></section><section id="section-Conversion Cost" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Conversion Cost</h2>See Adoption Cost. <br/></section><section id="section-Aesthetics" class="section"><h2 class="section-title">Aesthetics</h2>None. <br/></section></div></main><footer>Copyright © 2021 Jan Moringen</footer></body></html>