<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1 plus MathML 2.0//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/Math/DTD/mathml2/xhtml-math11-f.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta charset="utf-8"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/><script src="permalink.js"/><script src="navigation.js"/><title>Well-specified Common Lisp — Introduction</title></head><body><main><nav class="sidebar"><span class="name">Entry Points</span><br/><ol><li><a href="chap-0.xhtml#section-Figures">Table of Contents</a></li><li><a href="symbol-index.xhtml#section-SymbolIndex">Symbol Index</a></li><li><a href="figure-index.xhtml#section-FigureIndex">Figure Index</a></li><li><a href="issue-index.xhtml#section-IssueIndices">Issue Index</a></li><li><a href="note-indices.xhtml#section-ReviewerNoteIndex">Note Indices</a></li><li><a href="chapter-26.xhtml#section-Glossary">Glossary</a></li></ol><hr/><span class="name">Introduction</span><br/><ol class="local-toc"><li><a href="#section-Scope,Purpose,andHistory">Scope, Purpose, and History</a><ol> <li><a href="#section-ScopeandPurpose">Scope and Purpose</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-History">History</a><ol> </ol></li></ol></li><li><a href="#section-OrganizationoftheDocument">Organization of the Document</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-ReferencedPublications">Referenced Publications</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Definitions">Definitions</a><ol> <li><a href="#section-NotationalConventions">Notational Conventions</a><ol> <li><a href="#section-FontKey">Font Key</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-ModifiedBNF">Modified BNF Syntax</a><ol> <li><a href="#section-SplicinginModifiedBNFSyntax">Splicing in Modified BNF Syntax</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-IndirectioninModifiedBNFSyntax">Indirection in Modified BNF Syntax</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-AdditionalUsesforIndirectDefinitionsinModifiedBNFSyntax">Additional Uses for Indirect Definitions in Modified BNF Syntax</a><ol> </ol></li></ol></li><li><a href="#section-SpecialSymbols">Special Symbols</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-ObjectswithMultipleNotations">Objects with Multiple Notations</a><ol> <li><a href="#section-CaseInSymbols">Case in Symbols</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Numbers">Numbers</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-UseoftheDotCharacter">Use of the Dot Character</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-NIL">NIL</a><ol> </ol></li></ol></li><li><a href="#section-Designators">Designators</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-NonsenseWords">Nonsense Words</a><ol> </ol></li></ol></li><li><a href="#section-ErrorTerms">Error Terminology</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-RemovableText">Sections Not Formally Part Of This Standard</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-InterpretingDictionaryEntries">Interpreting Dictionary Entries</a><ol> <li><a href="#section-The``AffectedBy''SectionofaDictionaryEntry">The ``Affected By'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-The``Arguments''SectionofaDictionaryEntry">The ``Arguments'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-The``ArgumentsandValues''SectionofaDictionaryEntry">The ``Arguments and Values'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-The``BindingTypesAffected''SectionofaDictionaryEntry">The ``Binding Types Affected'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-The``ClassPrecedenceList''SectionofaDictionaryEntry">The ``Class Precedence List'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-TypeSpecEntries">Dictionary Entries for Type Specifiers</a><ol> <li><a href="#section-The``CompoundTypeSpecifierKind''SectionofaDictionaryEntry">The ``Compound Type Specifier Kind'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-The``CompoundTypeSpecifierSyntax''SectionofaDictionaryEntry">The ``Compound Type Specifier Syntax'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-The``CompoundTypeSpecifierArguments''SectionofaDictionaryEntry">The ``Compound Type Specifier Arguments'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-The``CompoundTypeSpecifierDescription''SectionofaDictionaryEntry">The ``Compound Type Specifier Description'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</a><ol> </ol></li></ol></li><li><a href="#section-The``ConstantValue''SectionofaDictionaryEntry">The ``Constant Value'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-The``Description''SectionofaDictionaryEntry">The ``Description'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-The``Examples''SectionofaDictionaryEntry">The ``Examples'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-The``ExceptionalSituations''SectionofaDictionaryEntry">The ``Exceptional Situations'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-The``InitialValue''SectionofaDictionaryEntry">The ``Initial Value'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-The``ArgumentPrecedenceOrder''SectionofaDictionaryEntry">The ``Argument Precedence Order'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-The``MethodSignature''SectionofaDictionaryEntry">The ``Method Signature'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-The``Name''SectionofaDictionaryEntry">The ``Name'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-The``Notes''SectionofaDictionaryEntry">The ``Notes'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-The``Pronunciation''SectionofaDictionaryEntry">The ``Pronunciation'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-The``SeeAlso''SectionofaDictionaryEntry">The ``See Also'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-The``SideEffects''SectionofaDictionaryEntry">The ``Side Effects'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-The``Supertypes''SectionofaDictionaryEntry">The ``Supertypes'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-The``Syntax''SectionofaDictionaryEntry">The ``Syntax'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</a><ol> <li><a href="#section-Special``Syntax''NotationsforOverloadedOperators">Special ``Syntax'' Notations for Overloaded Operators</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-NamingConventionsforRestParameters">Naming Conventions for Rest Parameters</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-RequiringNon-NullRestParametersinthe``Syntax''Section">Requiring Non-Null Rest Parameters in the ``Syntax'' Section</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-Returnvaluesinthe``Syntax''Section">Return values in the ``Syntax'' Section</a><ol> <li><a href="#section-NoArgumentsorValuesinthe``Syntax''Section">No Arguments or Values in the ``Syntax'' Section</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-UnconditionalTransferofControlinthe``Syntax''Section">Unconditional Transfer of Control in the ``Syntax'' Section</a><ol> </ol></li></ol></li></ol></li><li><a href="#section-The``ValidContext''SectionofaDictionaryEntry">The ``Valid Context'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-The``ValueType''SectionofaDictionaryEntry">The ``Value Type'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</a><ol> </ol></li></ol></li></ol></li><li><a href="#section-Conformance">Conformance</a><ol> <li><a href="#section-ConformingImplementations">Conforming Implementations</a><ol> <li><a href="#section-ReqLangFeatures">Required Language Features</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-DocumentationofImplementation-DependentFeatures">Documentation of Implementation-Dependent Features</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-DocumentationofExtensions">Documentation of Extensions</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-TreatmentofExceptionalSituations">Treatment of Exceptional Situations</a><ol> <li><a href="#section-ResolutionofApparentConflictsinExceptionalSituations">Resolution of Apparent Conflicts in Exceptional Situations</a><ol> <li><a href="#section-ExamplesofResolutionofApparentConflicts&#10;&#9;&#9;&#9;inExceptionalSituations">Examples of Resolution of Apparent Conflicts 
			  in Exceptional Situations</a><ol> </ol></li></ol></li></ol></li><li><a href="#section-ConformanceStatement">Conformance Statement</a><ol> </ol></li></ol></li><li><a href="#section-ConformingPrograms">Conforming Programs</a><ol> <li><a href="#section-UseofImplementation-DefinedLanguageFeatures">Use of Implementation-Defined Language Features</a><ol> <li><a href="#section-ReadTimeConditionals">Use of Read-Time Conditionals</a><ol> </ol></li></ol></li><li><a href="#section-CharacterSetforPortableCode">Character Set for Portable Code</a><ol> </ol></li></ol></li></ol></li><li><a href="#section-LanguageExtensions">Language Extensions</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-LanguageSubsets">Language Subsets</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-DeprecatedFeatures">Deprecated Language Features</a><ol> <li><a href="#section-DeprecatedFunctions">Deprecated Functions</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-DeprecatedArgumentConventions">Deprecated Argument Conventions</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-DeprecatedVariables">Deprecated Variables</a><ol> </ol></li><li><a href="#section-DeprecatedReaderSyntax">Deprecated Reader Syntax</a><ol> </ol></li></ol></li><li><a href="#section-CLsymbols">Symbols in the COMMON-LISP Package</a><ol> </ol></li></ol></nav><div class="content"><section id="section-ChapOne"><h1 class="section-title">1. Introduction</h1><section id="section-Scope,Purpose,andHistory"><h2 class="section-title">Scope, Purpose, and History</h2><section id="section-ScopeandPurpose"><h3 class="section-title">Scope and Purpose</h3>The specification set forth in this document is designed to promote
the portability of <span class="explicit-roman">Common Lisp</span> programs among a variety of data processing
systems. It is a language specification aimed at an audience of
implementors and knowledgeable programmers. It is neither a tutorial nor
an implementation guide.
</section><section id="section-History"><h3 class="section-title">History</h3>Lisp is a family of languages with a long history.  Early key ideas in
Lisp were developed by John McCarthy during the 1956 Dartmouth Summer
Research Project on Artificial Intelligence.  McCarthy's motivation
was to develop an algebraic list processing language for artificial
intelligence work.
Implementation efforts for early dialects of Lisp were undertaken on
the IBM704, the IBM7090, the Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) PDP-1,
the DECPDP-6, and the PDP-10. The primary dialect of Lisp between
1960 and 1965 was Lisp1.5. By the early 1970's there were two
predominant dialects of Lisp, both arising from these early efforts:
MacLisp and Interlisp.
For further information about very early Lisp dialects, 
see <span class="explicit-italic"> The Anatomy of Lisp</span> or <span class="explicit-italic"> Lisp 1.5 Programmer's Manual</span>.<br/>MacLisp improved on the Lisp1.5 notion of special variables and error
handling. MacLisp also introduced the concept of functions that could take
a variable number of arguments, macros, arrays, non-local dynamic
exits, fast arithmetic, the first good Lisp compiler, and an emphasis
on execution speed. 
By the end of the 1970's, MacLisp was in use at over 50 sites.
For further information about Maclisp, 
see <span class="explicit-italic"> Maclisp Reference Manual, Revision0</span> or <span class="explicit-italic"> The Revised Maclisp Manual</span>.<br/>Interlisp introduced many ideas into Lisp programming environments and
methodology. One of the Interlisp ideas that influenced <span class="explicit-roman">Common Lisp</span> was an iteration
construct implemented by Warren Teitelman that inspired the <a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-6.xhtml#macro-loop">loop</a>
macro used both on the Lisp Machines and in MacLisp, and now in <span class="explicit-roman">Common Lisp</span>.
For further information about Interlisp,
see <span class="explicit-italic"> Interlisp Reference Manual</span>.<br/>Although the first implementations of Lisp were on the IBM704 and the
IBM7090, later work focussed on the DEC
PDP-6 and, later, PDP-10 computers, the latter being the mainstay of
Lisp and artificial intelligence work at such places as 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Stanford University,
and 
Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) from the mid-1960's through much of the 1970's.
The PDP-10 computer and its predecessor the PDP-6 computer were, by
design, especially well-suited to Lisp because they had 36-bit words
and 18-bit addresses. This architecture allowed a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-cons">cons</a> cell to be
stored in one word; single instructions could extract the 
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-car">car</a> and <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-cdr">cdr</a>
parts.  The PDP-6 and PDP-10 had fast, powerful stack instructions
that enabled fast function calling.
But the limitations of the PDP-10 were evident by 1973: it supported a
small number of researchers using Lisp, and the small, 18-bit address
space (<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><msup><mrow>2</mrow><mo>18</mo></msup></math> = 262,144 words) limited the size of a single
program.
One response to the address space problem was the Lisp Machine, a
special-purpose computer designed to run Lisp programs.  The other
response was to use general-purpose computers with address spaces
larger than 18bits, such as the DEC VAX and
the S-1MarkIIA.
For further information about S-1 Common Lisp, see ``S-1 Common Lisp Implementation.''<br/>The Lisp machine concept was developed in the late 1960's.  In the
early 1970's, Peter Deutsch, working with 
Daniel Bobrow, implemented a Lisp on the
Alto, a single-user minicomputer, using microcode to interpret a
byte-code implementation language. Shortly thereafter, Richard
Greenblatt began work on a different hardware and instruction set
design at MIT.
Although the Alto was not a total success as a Lisp machine, a dialect
of Interlisp known as Interlisp-D became available on the D-series
machines manufactured by Xerox&mdash;the Dorado, Dandelion,
Dandetiger, and Dove (or Daybreak).
An upward-compatible extension of MacLisp called Lisp
Machine Lisp became available on the early MIT Lisp Machines.
Commercial Lisp machines from Xerox, Lisp Machines (LMI), and
Symbolics were on the market by 1981.
For further information about Lisp Machine Lisp, see <span class="explicit-italic"> Lisp Machine Manual</span>.<br/>During the late 1970's, Lisp Machine Lisp began to expand towards a
much fuller language.  Sophisticated lambda lists, 
<pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-setf">setf</a>
</span></code></pre>, multiple values, and structures
like those in <span class="explicit-roman">Common Lisp</span> are the results of early
experimentation with programming styles by the Lisp Machine group.
Jonl White and others migrated these features to MacLisp.
Around 1980, Scott Fahlman and others at CMU began work on a Lisp to
run on the Scientific Personal Integrated Computing
Environment (SPICE) workstation.  One of the goals of the project was to
design a simpler dialect than Lisp Machine Lisp.<br/>The Macsyma group at MIT began a project during the late 1970's called
the New Implementation of Lisp (NIL) for the VAX, which was headed by
White.  One of the stated goals of the NIL project was to fix many of
the historic, but annoying, problems with Lisp while retaining significant 
compatibility with MacLisp.  At about the same time, a research group at
Stanford University and Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory headed
by Richard P. Gabriel began the design of a Lisp to run on the
S-1MarkIIA supercomputer.  S-1Lisp, never completely
functional, was the test bed for adapting advanced compiler techniques
to Lisp implementation.  Eventually the S-1 and NIL groups
collaborated.
For further information about the NIL project,
see ``NIL&mdash;A Perspective.''<br/>
The first effort towards Lisp standardization was made in 1969, 
when Anthony Hearn and Martin Griss at the University of Utah 
defined Standard Lisp&mdash;a subset of Lisp1.5 and other dialects&mdash;to 
transport REDUCE, a symbolic algebra system.
During the 1970's, the Utah group implemented first a retargetable
optimizing compiler for Standard Lisp,
and then an extended implementation known as Portable Standard Lisp (PSL).
By the mid 1980's, PSL ran on about a dozen kinds of computers.
For further information about Standard Lisp, see ``Standard LISP Report.''<br/>PSL and Franz Lisp&mdash;a MacLisp-like dialect for Unix machines&mdash;were 
the first examples of widely available Lisp dialects on multiple 
hardware platforms. <br/>One of the most important developments in Lisp occurred during the
second half of the 1970's: Scheme. Scheme, designed by Gerald J.
Sussman and Guy L. Steele Jr., is a simple dialect of Lisp whose
design brought to Lisp some of the ideas from programming language
semantics developed in the 1960's.  Sussman was one of the prime
innovators behind many other advances in Lisp technology from the late
1960's through the 1970's.
The major contributions of Scheme were lexical scoping, lexical
closures, first-class continuations, and simplified syntax (no
separation of value cells and function cells). Some of these contributions made
a large impact on the design of <span class="explicit-roman">Common Lisp</span>.
For further information about Scheme, see <span class="explicit-italic"> IEEE Standard for the Scheme Programming Language</span> or ``Revised<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><msup><mrow/><mo>3</mo></msup></math> Report on the Algorithmic Language Scheme.''<br/>In the late 1970's object-oriented programming concepts started to
make a strong impact on Lisp. 
At MIT, certain ideas from Smalltalk made their way into several
widely used programming systems.
Flavors, an object-oriented programming system with multiple inheritance, 
was developed at MIT for the Lisp machine community by Howard Cannon and others.
At Xerox, the experience with Smalltalk and 
Knowledge Representation Language (KRL) led to the development of 
Lisp Object Oriented Programming System (LOOPS) and later Common LOOPS.
For further information on Smalltalk, see <span class="explicit-italic"> Smalltalk-80: The Language and its Implementation</span>.
For further information on Flavors, see <span class="explicit-italic"> Flavors: A Non-Hierarchical Approach to Object-Oriented Programming</span>.<br/>These systems influenced the design of the Common Lisp Object System (CLOS).
CLOS was developed specifically for this standardization effort,
and was separately written up in ``Common Lisp Object System Specification.''  However, minor details
of its design have changed slightly since that publication, and that paper 
should not be taken as an authoritative reference to the semantics of the
object system as described in this document.<br/>In 1980 Symbolics and LMI were developing Lisp Machine Lisp; stock-hardware
implementation groups were developing NIL, Franz Lisp, and PSL; Xerox
was developing Interlisp; and the SPICE project at CMU was developing
a MacLisp-like dialect of Lisp called SpiceLisp.<br/>In April 1981, after a DARPA-sponsored meeting concerning the
splintered Lisp community, Symbolics, the SPICE project, the NIL
project, and the S-1Lisp project joined together to define
<span class="explicit-roman">Common Lisp</span>.  Initially spearheaded by White and Gabriel, the
driving force behind this grassroots effort was provided by Fahlman,
Daniel Weinreb, David Moon, Steele,  and Gabriel.
<span class="explicit-roman">Common Lisp</span> was designed as a description of a family of languages.  The
primary influences on <span class="explicit-roman">Common Lisp</span> were Lisp Machine Lisp, MacLisp, NIL,
S-1Lisp, Spice Lisp, and Scheme.
<span class="explicit-italic"> Common Lisp: The Language</span> is a description of that design.  Its
semantics were intentionally underspecified in places where it was
felt that a tight specification would overly constrain <span class="explicit-roman">Common Lisp</span>
research and use.

In 1986 X3J13 was formed as a technical working group to
produce a draft for an ANSI <span class="explicit-roman">Common Lisp</span> standard. Because of the
acceptance of <span class="explicit-roman">Common Lisp</span>, the goals of this group differed from those of
the original designers. These new goals included stricter
standardization for portability, an object-oriented programming
system, a condition system, iteration facilities, and a way to handle
large character sets.  To accommodate those
goals, a new language specification, this
document, was developed.<br/></section>
</section><section id="section-OrganizationoftheDocument"><h2 class="section-title">Organization of the Document</h2>
This is a reference document, not a tutorial document.  Where possible
and convenient, the order of presentation has been chosen so that the
more primitive topics precede those that build upon them;  however,
linear readability has not been a priority.<br/>This document is divided into chapters by topic.
Any given chapter might contain conceptual material, dictionary entries, or both.<br/><a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-defined name">Defined names</a> within the dictionary portion of a chapter are
grouped in a way that brings related topics into physical proximity.
Many such groupings were possible,
and no deep significance should be inferred from the particular grouping that was chosen.
To see <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-defined name">defined names</a> grouped alphabetically, consult the index.
For a complete list of <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-defined name">defined names</a>, see <span class="section-reference error">section:CLsymbols.</span><br/>In order to compensate for the sometimes-unordered portions of this document, 
a glossary has been provided; see <span class="section-reference error">section:Glossary.</span>
The glossary provides connectivity by providing easy access to 
definitions of terms, and in some cases by providing examples or 
cross references to additional conceptual material.<br/>For information about notational conventions used in this document,
see <span class="section-reference error">section:Definitions.</span><br/>For information about conformance, see <span class="section-reference error">section:Conformance.</span> <br/>For information about extensions and subsets, see <a class="section-reference" href="#section-LanguageExtensions">Language Extensions</a>
and <a class="section-reference" href="#section-LanguageSubsets">Language Subsets</a>.<br/>For information about how <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-program">programs</a> in the language are parsed by the
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-lisp reader">Lisp reader</a>, see <span class="section-reference error">section:Syntax.</span><br/>For information about how <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-program">programs</a> in the language are <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-compile">compiled</a>
and <span class="glossary-reference error">glossary:executed</span>, see <span class="section-reference error">section:EvaluationAndCompilation.</span><br/>For information about data types, see <span class="section-reference error">section:TypesAndClasses.</span>
Not all <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">types</a> and <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-class">classes</a> are defined in this chapter;
many are defined in chapter corresponding to their topic&ndash;for example,
the numeric types are defined in <a class="section-reference" href="#section-Numbers">Numbers</a>.
For a complete list of <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-standardized">standardized</a> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">types</a>, 
see <span class="figure-reference error">figure:StandardizedAtomicTypeSpecs.</span><br/>For information about general purpose control and data flow,
see <a class="section-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#section-ChapFive">Data and Control Flow</a> or <a class="section-reference" href="chapter-6.xhtml#section-ChapSix">Iteration</a>.<br/>
</section><section id="section-ReferencedPublications"><h2 class="section-title">Referenced Publications</h2>
<ul><li><span class="explicit-italic"> The Anatomy of Lisp</span>,
        John Allen, McGraw-Hill, Inc., 1978.<br/></li><li><span class="explicit-italic"> The Art of Computer Programming, Volume 3</span>,
             Donald E. Knuth, Addison-Wesley Company (Reading, MA), 1973.<br/></li><li><span class="explicit-italic"> The Art of the Metaobject Protocol</span>,
	Kiczales et al., MIT Press (Cambridge, MA), 1991.<br/></li><li>``Common Lisp Object System Specification,''
        D. Bobrow, L. DiMichiel, R.P. Gabriel, S. Keene, G. Kiczales, D. Moon,
        <span class="explicit-italic"> SIGPLAN Notices</span> V23, September, 1988.<br/></li><li><span class="explicit-italic"> Common Lisp: The Language</span>,
        Guy L. Steele Jr., Digital Press (Burlington, MA), 1984.<br/></li><li><span class="explicit-italic"> Common Lisp: The Language, Second Edition</span>,
        Guy L. Steele Jr., Digital Press (Bedford, MA), 1990.<br/></li><li><span class="explicit-italic"> Exceptional Situations in Lisp</span>,
	Kent M. Pitman,
	<span class="explicit-italic"> Proceedings of the First European Conference
	     on the Practical Application of LISP</span>
        (EUROPAL '90),
	Churchill College, Cambridge, England,
	March 27-29, 1990.<br/></li><li><span class="explicit-italic"> Flavors: A Non-Hierarchical Approach to Object-Oriented Programming</span>,
	Howard I. Cannon, 1982.<br/></li><li><span class="explicit-italic"> IEEE Standard for Binary Floating-Point Arithmetic</span>,
        ANSI/IEEE Std 754-1985,
        Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. (New York), 1985.<br/></li><li><span class="explicit-italic"> IEEE Standard for the Scheme Programming Language</span>,
	IEEE Std 1178-1990,
	Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, Inc. (New York), 1991.<br/></li><li><span class="explicit-italic"> Interlisp Reference Manual</span>, Third Revision,
	Teitelman, Warren, et al,
	Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (Palo Alto, CA), 1978.<br/></li><li><span class="explicit-roman">ISO 6937/2</span>,
	<span class="explicit-italic"> Information processing&mdash;Coded character sets 
           for text communication&mdash;Part 2: Latin alphabetic and non-alphabetic
           graphic characters</span>, 
	ISO, 1983.<br/></li><li><span class="explicit-italic"> Lisp 1.5 Programmer's Manual</span>,
	John McCarthy, MIT Press (Cambridge, MA), August, 1962.<br/></li><li><span class="explicit-italic"> Lisp Machine Manual</span>,
	D.L. Weinreb and D.A. Moon,
	Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT (Cambridge, MA), July, 1981.<br/></li><li><span class="explicit-italic"> Maclisp Reference Manual, Revision0</span>,
	David A. Moon, Project MAC (Laboratory for Computer Science),
        MIT (Cambridge, MA), March, 1974.<br/></li><li>``NIL&mdash;A Perspective,'' 
        JonL White, <span class="explicit-italic"> Macsyma User's Conference</span>, 1979.<br/></li><li><span class="explicit-italic"> Performance and Evaluation of Lisp Programs</span>,
	Richard P. Gabriel, MIT Press (Cambridge, MA), 1985.<br/></li><li>``Principal Values and Branch Cuts in Complex APL,'' 
        Paul Penfield Jr., <span class="explicit-italic"> APL 81 Conference Proceedings</span>,
        ACM SIGAPL (San Francisco, September 1981), 248-256.
        Proceedings published as <span class="explicit-italic"> APL Quote Quad 12</span>, 1 (September 1981).<br/></li><li><span class="explicit-italic"> The Revised Maclisp Manual</span>,
	Kent M. Pitman, 
	Technical Report 295,
	Laboratory for Computer Science, MIT (Cambridge, MA), May 1983.<br/></li><li>``Revised<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><msup><mrow/><mo>3</mo></msup></math> Report on the Algorithmic Language Scheme,''
        Jonathan Rees and William Clinger (editors), 
        <span class="explicit-italic"> SIGPLAN Notices</span> V21, #12, December, 1986.<br/></li><li>``S-1 Common Lisp Implementation,''
	R.A. Brooks, R.P. Gabriel, and G.L. Steele,
	<span class="explicit-italic"> Conference Record of the 1982 ACM Symposium on Lisp and Functional Programming</span>,
	108-113, 1982.<br/></li><li><span class="explicit-italic"> Smalltalk-80: The Language and its Implementation</span>,
        A. Goldberg and D. Robson, Addison-Wesley, 1983.<br/></li><li>``Standard LISP Report,''
        J.B. Marti, A.C. Hearn, M.L. Griss, and C. Griss,
        <span class="explicit-italic"> SIGPLAN Notices</span> V14, #10, October, 1979.<br/></li><li><span class="explicit-italic"> Webster's Third New International Dictionary
 the English Language, Unabridged</span>,
	Merriam Webster (Springfield, MA), 1986.<br/></li><li><span class="explicit-italic"> XP: A Common Lisp Pretty Printing System</span>,
        R.C. Waters,
	Memo 1102a,
	Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT (Cambridge, MA), September 1989.<br/></li></ul>

</section><section id="section-Definitions"><h2 class="section-title">Definitions</h2>

This section contains notational conventions and definitions of terms
used in this manual.<br/><section id="section-NotationalConventions"><h3 class="section-title">Notational Conventions</h3><a id="index/text-notation"></a><br/>The following notational conventions are used throughout this document.<br/><section id="section-FontKey"><h4 class="section-title">Font Key</h4><a id="index/text-font key"></a><br/>Fonts are used in this document to convey information.<br/><dl><dt><a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-name">name</a></dt><dd>Denotes a formal term whose meaning is defined in the Glossary.
When this font is used, the Glossary definition takes precedence 
over normal English usage.<br/>Sometimes a glossary term appears subscripted, 
as in ``<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-whitespace">whitespace</a><sub>2</sub>.''  
Such a notation selects one particular Glossary definition out of several,
in this case the second.
The subscript notation for Glossary terms is generally used where the
context might be insufficient to disambiguate among the available definitions.<br/></dd><dt><span class="newterm">name</span></dt><dd>Denotes the introduction of a formal term locally to the current text.
There is still a corresponding glossary entry, and is formally equivalent
to a use of ``<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-name">name</a>,'' but the hope is that making such uses 
conspicuous will save the reader a trip to the glossary in some cases.<br/></dd><dt><span class="symbol-reference error">symbol:name</span></dt><dd>Denotes a symbol in the <a class="package-reference" href="#package-common-lisp">common-lisp</a> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-package">package</a>.
For information about <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-case">case</a> conventions,
see <span class="section-reference error">section:CaseInSymbols.</span><br/></dd><dt><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">name</span>
</span></code></pre></dt><dd>Denotes a sample <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-name">name</a> or piece of <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-code">code</a> that a programmer
might write in <span class="explicit-roman">Common Lisp</span>.<br/>This font is also used for certain <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-standardized">standardized</a> names that are not
names of <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-external symbol">external symbols</a> of the <a class="package-reference" href="#package-common-lisp">common-lisp</a> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-package">package</a>, 
such as <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-keyword">keywords</a><sub>1</sub>,
        <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-package">package</a> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-name">names</a>,
    and <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-loop keyword">loop keywords</a>.<br/></dd><dt><span class="parameter">name</span></dt><dd>Denotes the name of a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-parameter">parameter</a> or <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-value">value</a>.<br/>In some situations the notation ``<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟨</mi><mi>⟨</mi></math><span class="parameter">name</span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟩</mi><mi>⟩</mi></math>'' (<span class="explicit-italic"> i.e.</span>,  the same font,
but with surrounding ``angle brackets'') is used instead in order to
provide better visual separation from surrounding characters.  These
``angle brackets'' are metasyntactic, and never actually appear in program
input or output.<br/></dd></dl><br/></section><section id="section-ModifiedBNF"><h4 class="section-title">Modified BNF Syntax</h4><a id="index/text-bnf key"></a>
<br/>This specification uses an extended Backus Normal Form (BNF) to
describe the syntax of <span class="explicit-roman">Common Lisp</span> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-macro form">macro forms</a> and <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-special form">special forms</a>.
This section discusses the syntax of BNF expressions.<br/><section id="section-SplicinginModifiedBNFSyntax"><h5 class="section-title">Splicing in Modified BNF Syntax</h5>The primary extension used is the following:<br/><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="block">\hbox<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>[</mi><mi>[</mi></math> <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">O</math><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>]</mi><mi>]</mi></math></math>An expression of this form appears whenever a list of elements is
to be spliced into a larger structure and the elements can appear in
any order. The symbol <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">O</math> represents a description of the syntax of
some number of syntactic elements to be spliced; that description must
be of the form<br/><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="block"><msub><mrow>O</mrow><mo>1 </mo></msub><mi>|</mi> <mi>…</mi> <mi>|</mi><msub><mrow> O</mrow><mo>l</mo></msub></math> where each <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><msub><mrow>O</mrow><mo>i</mo></msub></math> can be of the form <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">S</math> or of
the form <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">S</math><span class="explicit-roman">*</span> or of the form <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">\hbox<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">S</math><msup><mrow/><mo>1</mo></msup></math>.
The expression <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>[</mi><mi>[</mi></math> <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">O</math><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>]</mi><mi>]</mi></math> means that a list of the form<br/><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="block"><msub><mrow>(O</mrow><mo><msub><mrow>i</mrow><mo>1</mo></msub></mo></msub><mi>…</mi><msub><mrow>O</mrow><mo><msub><mrow>i</mrow><mo>j</mo></msub></mo></msub>)1<mo>≤</mo>j</math> is spliced into the enclosing expression,
such that if <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">n <mo>≠</mo>m</math> and <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">1<mo>≤</mo>n,m<mo>≤</mo>j</math>,
then either <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><msub><mrow>O</mrow><mo><msub><mrow>i</mrow><mo>n</mo></msub></mo></msub><mo>≠</mo><msub><mrow>O</mrow><mo><msub><mrow>i</mrow><mo>m</mo></msub></mo></msub></math>
         or <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><msub><mrow>O</mrow><mo><msub><mrow>i</mrow><mo>n</mo></msub></mo></msub><msub><mrow>= O</mrow><mo><msub><mrow>i</mrow><mo>m</mo></msub></mo></msub><msub><mrow>= Q</mrow><mo>k</mo></msub></math>, 
where for some <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">1<mo>≤</mo>k <mo>≤</mo>n</math>, <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><msub><mrow>O</mrow><mo>k</mo></msub></math> is of the form <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><msub><mrow>Q</mrow><mo>k</mo></msub></math><span class="explicit-roman">*</span>.
Furthermore, for each <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><msub><mrow>O</mrow><mo><msub><mrow>i</mrow><mo>n</mo></msub></mo></msub></math> that is of the form <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">\hbox<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><msub><mrow>Q</mrow><mo>k</mo></msub></math><msup><mrow/><mo>1</mo></msup></math>,
that element is required to appear somewhere in the list to be spliced.

For example, the expression<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>[</mi><mi>[</mi></math> A | B<span class="explicit-roman">*</span> | C<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>]</mi><mi>]</mi></math> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span>
</span></code></pre><br/> means that at most one <span class="explicit-mono">A</span>, any number of <span class="explicit-mono">B</span>'s, and
at most one <span class="explicit-mono">C</span> can occur in any order.
It is a description of any of these:<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span>
<span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">A</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">C</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span>
<span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">A</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">C</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span>
<span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">C</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">A</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span>
</span></code></pre><br/> but not any of these:<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">A</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">A</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">C</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">C</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span>
<span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">C</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">C</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span>
</span></code></pre><br/> In the first case, both <span class="explicit-mono">A</span> and <span class="explicit-mono">C</span> appear too often,
and in the second case <span class="explicit-mono">C</span> appears too often.<br/>
The notation <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">\hbox<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>[</mi><mi>[</mi></math> <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><msub><mrow>O</mrow><mo>1</mo></msub></math> | <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><msub><mrow>O</mrow><mo>2</mo></msub></math> | <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>…</mi></math><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>]</mi><mi>]</mi></math><msup><mrow/><mo>+</mo></msup></math> 
adds the additional restriction that at least one item from among the possible
choices must be used.  For example:<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">\hbox<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>[</mi><mi>[</mi></math> A | B<span class="explicit-roman">*</span> | C<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>]</mi><mi>]</mi></math><msup><mrow/><mo>+</mo></msup></math> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span>
</span></code></pre><br/> means that at most one <span class="explicit-mono">A</span>, any number of <span class="explicit-mono">B</span>'s, and
at most one <span class="explicit-mono">C</span> can occur in any order, but that in any case at least
one of these options must be selected.
It is a description of any of these:<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span>
<span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">A</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">C</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span>
<span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">A</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">C</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span>
<span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">C</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">A</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span>
</span></code></pre><br/> but not any of these:<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span>
<span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">A</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">A</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">C</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">C</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span>
<span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">C</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">C</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span>
</span></code></pre><br/> In the first case, no item was used;
in the second case, both <span class="explicit-mono">A</span> and <span class="explicit-mono">C</span> appear too often;
and in the third case <span class="explicit-mono">C</span> appears too often.<br/>Also, the expression:<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>[</mi><mi>[</mi></math> <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">\hboxA<msup><mrow/><mo>1</mo></msup></math> | <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">\hboxB<msup><mrow/><mo>1</mo></msup></math> | C<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>]</mi><mi>]</mi></math> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span>
</span></code></pre><br/> can generate exactly these and no others:<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">A</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">C</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span>
<span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">A</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">C</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span>
<span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">A</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span>
<span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">A</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">C</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span>
<span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">C</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">A</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span>
<span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">A</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span>
<span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">C</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">A</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span>
<span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">C</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">A</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span>
</span></code></pre><br/>
</section><section id="section-IndirectioninModifiedBNFSyntax"><h5 class="section-title">Indirection in Modified BNF Syntax</h5>An indirection extension is introduced in order to make this
new syntax more readable:<br/><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="block">\hbox<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>↓</mi></math><span class="parameter">O</span></math> If <span class="parameter">O</span> is a non-terminal symbol, the right-hand side
of its definition is substituted for the entire expression 
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>↓</mi></math><span class="parameter">O</span>.  For example, the following BNF is equivalent to
the BNF in the previous example:<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>[</mi><mi>[</mi></math> <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>↓</mi></math><span class="parameter">O</span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>]</mi><mi>]</mi></math> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span>
</span></code></pre>
<br/>


<tr><td>O</td><td>::=</td><td><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">A</span>
</span></code></pre> | <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span>
</span></code></pre><span class="explicit-roman">*</span> | <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">C</span>
</span></code></pre></td></tr>
<br/>

<br/></section><section id="section-AdditionalUsesforIndirectDefinitionsinModifiedBNFSyntax"><h5 class="section-title">Additional Uses for Indirect Definitions in Modified BNF Syntax</h5>In some cases, an auxiliary definition in the BNF might appear to be unused
within the BNF, but might still be useful elsewhere.  For example, consider the
following definitions:<br/><span class="function-definition"><span class="name">case</span>&nbsp;<span class="lambda-list">keyform  <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mo>{</mo></math><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>↓</mi></math><span class="parameter">normal-clause</span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mo>}</mo></math><span class="explicit-roman">*</span> <span class="explicit-roman">[</span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>↓</mi></math><span class="parameter">otherwise-clause</span><span class="explicit-roman">]</span></span>&nbsp;→&nbsp;<span class="return-values"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mo>{</mo></math><span class="parameter">result</span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mo>}</mo></math><span class="explicit-roman">*</span></span></span><br/>
<span class="function-definition"><span class="name">ccase</span>&nbsp;<span class="lambda-list">keyplace <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mo>{</mo></math><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>↓</mi></math><span class="parameter">normal-clause</span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mo>}</mo></math><span class="explicit-roman">*</span></span>&nbsp;→&nbsp;<span class="return-values"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mo>{</mo></math><span class="parameter">result</span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mo>}</mo></math><span class="explicit-roman">*</span></span></span><br/>
<span class="function-definition"><span class="name">ecase</span>&nbsp;<span class="lambda-list">keyform  <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mo>{</mo></math><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>↓</mi></math><span class="parameter">normal-clause</span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mo>}</mo></math><span class="explicit-roman">*</span></span>&nbsp;→&nbsp;<span class="return-values"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mo>{</mo></math><span class="parameter">result</span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mo>}</mo></math><span class="explicit-roman">*</span></span></span><br/><br/><tr><td>normal-clause</td><td>::=</td><td><span class="explicit-roman">(</span>keys <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mo>{</mo></math><span class="parameter">form</span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mo>}</mo></math><span class="explicit-roman">*</span><span class="explicit-roman">)</span></td></tr>
<tr><td>otherwise-clause</td><td>::=</td><td><span class="explicit-roman">(</span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mo>{</mo></math>otherwise | t<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mo>}</mo></math> <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mo>{</mo></math><span class="parameter">form</span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mo>}</mo></math><span class="explicit-roman">*</span><span class="explicit-roman">)</span></td></tr>
<tr><td>clause</td><td>::=</td><td>normal-clause | otherwise-clause</td></tr>
<br/>

<br/>Here the term ``<span class="parameter">clause</span>'' might appear to be ``dead'' in that it
is not used in the BNF.  However, the purpose of the BNF is not just to guide parsing,
but also to define useful terms for reference in the descriptive text which follows.
As such, the term ``<span class="parameter">clause</span>'' might appear in text that follows,
as shorthand for ``<span class="parameter">normal-clause</span> or <span class="parameter">otherwise-clause</span>.''<br/></section></section><section id="section-SpecialSymbols"><h4 class="section-title">Special Symbols</h4>The special symbols described here are used as a notational convenience
within this document, and are part of neither the <span class="explicit-roman">Common Lisp</span> language nor
its environment.<br/><dl><dt><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>→</mi></math></dt><dd>This indicates evaluation.
For example:<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-+">+</a> <span class="syntax-number">4</span> <span class="syntax-number">5</span>)</span> <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>→</mi></math> <span class="syntax-number">9</span> 
</span></code></pre>
This means that the result of
evaluating the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-form">form</a> <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-+">+</a> <span class="syntax-number">4</span> <span class="syntax-number">5</span>)</span>
</span></code></pre> is <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-number">9</span>
</span></code></pre>.<br/>If a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-form">form</a> returns <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-multiple values">multiple values</a>, those values might
be shown separated by spaces, line breaks, or commas.
For example:<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-truncate">truncate</a> <span class="syntax-number">7</span> <span class="syntax-number">5</span>)</span>
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>→</mi></math> <span class="syntax-number">1</span> <span class="syntax-number">2</span>
 <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-truncate">truncate</a> <span class="syntax-number">7</span> <span class="syntax-number">5</span>)</span> 
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>→</mi></math> <span class="syntax-number">1</span>
   <span class="syntax-number">2</span>
 <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-truncate">truncate</a> <span class="syntax-number">7</span> <span class="syntax-number">5</span>)</span>
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>→</mi></math> <span class="syntax-number">1</span><span class="syntax-verbatim">,</span> <span class="syntax-number">2</span>
</span></code></pre><br/>Each of the above three examples is equivalent, and specifies
that <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-truncate">truncate</a> <span class="syntax-number">7</span> <span class="syntax-number">5</span>)</span>
</span></code></pre> returns two values, which are <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-number">1</span>
</span></code></pre> and <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-number">2</span>
</span></code></pre>.<br/>Some <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming implementation">conforming implementations</a> actually type an arrow (or some
other indicator) before showing return values, while others do not.<br/></dd><dt><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mover>or<mi>→</mi></mover></math></dt><dd>The notation ``<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mover>or<mi>→</mi></mover></math>'' is used to denote one of several possible
alternate results.  The example<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-char-name">char-name</a> <span class="syntax-character">#\a</span>)</span>
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>→</mi></math> <a class="section-reference" href="#section-NIL">NIL</a>
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mover>or<mi>→</mi></mover></math> <span class="syntax-string">"LOWERCASE-a"</span>
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mover>or<mi>→</mi></mover></math> <span class="syntax-string">"Small-A"</span>
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mover>or<mi>→</mi></mover></math> <span class="syntax-string">"LA01"</span>
</span></code></pre><br/>indicates that <a class="symbol-reference" href="#symbol-nil">nil</a>, <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-string">"LOWERCASE-a"</span>
</span></code></pre>, <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-string">"Small-A"</span>
</span></code></pre>, <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-string">"LA01"</span>
</span></code></pre> are
among the possible results of <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-char-name">char-name</a> #\a)</span>
</span></code></pre>&mdash;each with equal preference.
Unless explicitly specified otherwise, it should not be assumed that the set of possible 
results shown is exhaustive.
Formally, the above example is equivalent to<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-char-name">char-name</a> <span class="syntax-character">#\a</span>)</span> <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>→</mi></math> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation-dependent">implementation-dependent</a>
</span></code></pre><br/>but it is intended to provide additional information to illustrate some
of the ways in which it is permitted for implementations to diverge.<br/></dd><dt><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mover>not<mi>→</mi></mover></math></dt><dd>The notation ``<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mover>not<mi>→</mi></mover></math>'' is used to denote a result which is not possible.
This might be used, for example, in order to emphasize a situation where
some anticipated misconception might lead the reader to falsely believe
that the result might be possible.  For example,<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#function-function-lambda-expression">function-lambda-expression</a> 
    <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#function-funcall">funcall</a> <span class="syntax-function">#'<span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#macro-lambda">lambda</a> <span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span>)</span> <span class="syntax-function">#'<span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#macro-lambda">lambda</a> <span class="syntax-symbol">()</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span>)</span></span>)</span></span> <a class="section-reference" href="#section-NIL">NIL</a>)</span>)</span>
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>→</mi></math> <a class="section-reference" href="#section-NIL">NIL</a><span class="syntax-verbatim">,</span> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-true">true</a><span class="syntax-verbatim">,</span> <a class="section-reference" href="#section-NIL">NIL</a>
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mover>or<mi>→</mi></mover></math> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#macro-lambda">lambda</a> <span class="syntax-symbol">()</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">X</span>)</span><span class="syntax-verbatim">,</span> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-true">true</a><span class="syntax-verbatim">,</span> <a class="section-reference" href="#section-NIL">NIL</a>
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mover>not<mi>→</mi></mover></math> <a class="section-reference" href="#section-NIL">NIL</a><span class="syntax-verbatim">,</span> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-false">false</a><span class="syntax-verbatim">,</span> <a class="section-reference" href="#section-NIL">NIL</a>
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mover>not<mi>→</mi></mover></math> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#macro-lambda">lambda</a> <span class="syntax-symbol">()</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">X</span>)</span><span class="syntax-verbatim">,</span> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-false">false</a><span class="syntax-verbatim">,</span> <a class="section-reference" href="#section-NIL">NIL</a>
</span></code></pre><br/></dd><dt><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mo>≡</mo></math></dt><dd>This indicates code equivalence. For example:<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-gcd">gcd</a> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-gcd">gcd</a> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">z</span>)</span>)</span> <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mo>≡</mo></math> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-gcd">gcd</a> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-gcd">gcd</a> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">z</span>)</span>
</span></code></pre>
This means that the results and observable side-effects of evaluating
the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-form">form</a>
<pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-gcd">gcd</a> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-gcd">gcd</a> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">z</span>)</span>)</span>
</span></code></pre>  are always the same as the results
and observable side-effects of
<pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-gcd">gcd</a> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-gcd">gcd</a> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>)</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">z</span>)</span>
</span></code></pre>  for any 
<pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span>
</span></code></pre>, <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">y</span>
</span></code></pre>, and <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">z</span>
</span></code></pre>.<br/>
</dd><dt><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>▷</mi></math></dt><dd><span class="explicit-roman">Common Lisp</span> specifies input and output with respect to a non-interactive stream model.
The specific details of how interactive input and output are mapped onto that
non-interactive model are <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation-defined">implementation-defined</a>.<br/>For example, <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming implementation">conforming implementations</a> are permitted to differ in issues 
of how interactive input is terminated.  For example, the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-function">function</a> <a class="function-reference" href="chapter-23.xhtml#function-read">read</a>
terminates when the final delimiter is typed on a non-interactive stream.
In some <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation">implementations</a>, an interactive call to <a class="function-reference" href="chapter-23.xhtml#function-read">read</a> returns
as soon as the final delimiter is typed, even if that delimiter is not a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-newline">newline</a>.
In other <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation">implementations</a>, a final <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-newline">newline</a> is always required.
In still other <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation">implementations</a>, there might be a command which ``activates''
a buffer full of input without the command itself being visible on the program's
input stream.<br/>In the examples in this document, the notation ``<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>▷</mi></math>'' precedes 
lines where interactive input and output occurs.  Within such a scenario,
``<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><span style="text-decoration: underline;">\hboxthis notation</span></math>'' notates user input.<br/>For example, the notation<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-+">+</a> <span class="syntax-number">1</span> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#function-print">print</a> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-+">+</a> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-sqrt">sqrt</a> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-23.xhtml#function-read">read</a>)</span>)</span> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-sqrt">sqrt</a> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-23.xhtml#function-read">read</a>)</span>)</span>)</span>)</span>)</span>
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>▷</mi></math> <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><span style="text-decoration: underline;">\hbox9 16 </span></math>
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>▷</mi></math> 7
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>→</mi></math> <span class="syntax-number">8</span>
</span></code></pre><br/>shows an interaction in which
  ``<pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-+">+</a> <span class="syntax-number">1</span> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#function-print">print</a> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-+">+</a> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-sqrt">sqrt</a> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-23.xhtml#function-read">read</a>)</span>)</span> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-sqrt">sqrt</a> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-23.xhtml#function-read">read</a>)</span>)</span>)</span>)</span>)</span>
</span></code></pre>''
    is a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-form">form</a> to be <span class="glossary-reference error">glossary:evaluated</span>,
  ``<pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-number">9</span> <span class="syntax-number">16</span> 
</span></code></pre>'' is interactive input,
  ``<pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-number">7</span>
</span></code></pre>'' is interactive output, and 
  ``<pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-number">8</span>
</span></code></pre>'' is the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-value">value</a> <span class="glossary-reference error">glossary:yielded</span> from the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-evaluation">evaluation</a>.<br/>The use of this notation is intended to disguise small differences 
in interactive input and output behavior between <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation">implementations</a>.<br/>Sometimes, the non-interactive stream model calls for a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-newline">newline</a>.
How that <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-newline">newline</a> character is interactively entered is an 
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation-defined">implementation-defined</a> detail of the user interface, but in that
case, either the notation ``<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟨</mi></math><span class="explicit-italic"> Newline</span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟩</mi></math>'' or ``<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>↩</mi></math>'' might be used.<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#special-operator-progn">progn</a> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#function-format">format</a> <a class="section-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#section-T">T</a> <span class="syntax-string">"~&amp;Who? "</span>)</span> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-read-line">read-line</a>)</span>)</span>
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>▷</mi></math> Who? <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><span style="text-decoration: underline;">\hboxFred, Mary, and Sally<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>↩</mi></math></span></math>
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>→</mi></math> <span class="syntax-string">"Fred, Mary, and Sally"</span><span class="syntax-verbatim">,</span> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-false">false</a>
</span></code></pre><br/></dd></dl><br/></section><section id="section-ObjectswithMultipleNotations"><h4 class="section-title">Objects with Multiple Notations</h4>Some <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-object">objects</a> in <span class="explicit-roman">Common Lisp</span> can be notated in more than one way.
In such situations, the choice of which notation to use is technically arbitrary,
but conventions may exist which convey a ``point of view'' or ``sense of intent.''<br/><section id="section-CaseInSymbols"><h5 class="section-title">Case in Symbols</h5><a id="index/text-case in symbol names"></a>
<br/>While <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-case">case</a> is significant in the process of <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-intern">interning</a> a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-symbol">symbol</a>,
the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-lisp reader">Lisp reader</a>, by default, attempts to canonicalize the case of a
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-symbol">symbol</a> prior to interning; see <span class="section-reference error">section:ReadtableCaseReadEffect.</span>
As such, case in <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-symbol">symbols</a> is not, by default, significant.
Throughout this document, except as explicitly noted otherwise,
the case in which a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-symbol">symbol</a> appears is not significant; 
that is, <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">HELLO</span>
</span></code></pre>, <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">Hello</span>
</span></code></pre>, <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">hElLo</span>
</span></code></pre>, and <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">hello</span>
</span></code></pre> are
all equivalent ways to denote a symbol whose name is <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-string">"HELLO"</span>
</span></code></pre>.<br/>The characters <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-backslash">backslash</a> and <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-vertical-bar">vertical-bar</a> are used to explicitly
quote the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-case">case</a> and other parsing-related 
aspects
of characters.  As such,
the notations <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">|hello|</span>
</span></code></pre> and <pre><code><span class="syntax-root">\h\e\l\l\o
</span></code></pre> are equivalent ways
to refer to a symbol whose name is <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-string">"hello"</span>
</span></code></pre>, and which is <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-distinct">distinct</a> from
any symbol whose name is <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-string">"HELLO"</span>
</span></code></pre>.<br/>The <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-symbol">symbols</a> that correspond to <span class="explicit-roman">Common Lisp</span> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-defined name">defined names</a>
have <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-uppercase">uppercase</a> names even though their names generally appear
in <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-lowercase">lowercase</a> in this document.<br/></section><section id="section-Numbers"><h5 class="section-title">Numbers</h5>Although <span class="explicit-roman">Common Lisp</span> provides a variety of ways for programs to manipulate the
input and output radix for rational numbers, all numbers in this document
are in decimal notation unless explicitly noted otherwise.<br/></section><section id="section-UseoftheDotCharacter"><h5 class="section-title">Use of the Dot Character</h5>The dot appearing by itself in an <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-expression">expression</a> such as<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="parameter">item1</span> <span class="parameter">item2</span> <span class="explicit-mono">.</span> <span class="parameter">tail</span>)</span>
</span></code></pre><br/>means that <span class="parameter">tail</span> represents a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-list">list</a> of <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-object">objects</a> 
at the end of a list.  For example,<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">A</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">C</span> <span class="explicit-mono">.</span> <span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">D</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">E</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">F</span>)</span>)</span>
</span></code></pre><br/>is notationally equivalent to:<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">A</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">B</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">C</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">D</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">E</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">F</span>)</span>
</span></code></pre><br/>Although <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-dot">dot</a> is a valid constituent character in a symbol, no 
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-standardized">standardized</a> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-symbol">symbols</a> contain the character <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-dot">dot</a>,
so a period that follows a reference to a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-symbol">symbol</a> at the end of
a sentence in this document should always be interpreted as a period
and never as part of the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-symbol">symbol</a>'s <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-name">name</a>.
For example, within this document, a sentence such as
 ``This sample sentence refers to the symbol <a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-car">car</a>.'' 
refers to a symbol whose name is <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-string">"CAR"</span>
</span></code></pre> (with three letters),
and never to a four-letter symbol <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-string">"CAR."</span>
</span></code></pre><br/></section><section id="section-NIL"><h5 class="section-title">NIL</h5><a id="index/term-nil"></a><a id="index/term-()"></a><a id="symbol-nil"></a><br/><a class="symbol-reference" href="#symbol-nil">nil</a> has a variety of meanings.
It is a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-symbol">symbol</a> in the <a class="package-reference" href="#package-common-lisp">common-lisp</a> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-package">package</a> with the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-name">name</a> <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-string">"NIL"</span>
</span></code></pre>,
it is <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-boolean">boolean</a> (and <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-generalized boolean">generalized boolean</a>) <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-false">false</a>,
it is the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-empty list">empty list</a>,
and it is the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-name">name</a> of the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-empty type">empty type</a> (a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-subtype">subtype</a> of all <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">types</a>).<br/>Within <span class="explicit-roman">Common Lisp</span>, <a class="symbol-reference" href="#symbol-nil">nil</a> can be notated interchangeably as either <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><a class="section-reference" href="#section-NIL">NIL</a>
</span></code></pre> or <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-symbol">()</span>
</span></code></pre>.
By convention, the choice of notation offers a hint as to which of its many
roles it is playing.<br/><span class="float" id="figure-Notations for NIL"><table><tbody><tr><td><span class="explicit-bold"> For Evaluation?</span></td><td><span class="explicit-bold"> Notation</span></td><td><span class="explicit-bold"> Typically Implied Role</span></td></tr><tr><td>
Yes</td><td><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><a class="section-reference" href="#section-NIL">NIL</a>
</span></code></pre></td><td>use as a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-boolean">boolean</a>.</td></tr><tr><td>Yes</td><td><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-quote">'<a class="section-reference" href="#section-NIL">NIL</a></span>
</span></code></pre></td><td>use as a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-symbol">symbol</a>.</td></tr><tr><td>Yes</td><td><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-quote">'<span class="syntax-symbol">()</span></span>
</span></code></pre></td><td>use as an <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-empty list">empty list</a></td></tr><tr><td>No</td><td><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><a class="section-reference" href="#section-NIL">NIL</a>
</span></code></pre></td><td>use as a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-symbol">symbol</a> or <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-boolean">boolean</a>.</td></tr><tr><td>No</td><td><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-symbol">()</span>
</span></code></pre></td><td>use as an <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-empty list">empty list</a>.</td></tr></tbody></table><div class="caption">Notations for NIL</div></span><br/>Within this document only, <a class="symbol-reference" href="#symbol-nil">nil</a> is also sometimes notated as <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-false">false</a> to
emphasize its role as a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-boolean">boolean</a>.<br/>For example:<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#function-print">print</a> <span class="syntax-symbol">()</span>)</span>                          ;avoided
<span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-defun">defun</a> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">three</span> <a class="section-reference" href="#section-NIL">NIL</a> <span class="syntax-number">3</span>)</span>                 ;avoided 
<span class="syntax-quote">'<span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="section-reference" href="#section-NIL">NIL</a> <a class="section-reference" href="#section-NIL">NIL</a>)</span></span>                          ;list of two symbols
<span class="syntax-quote">'<span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-symbol">()</span> <span class="syntax-symbol">()</span>)</span></span>                            ;list of empty lists
<span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-defun">defun</a> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">three</span> <span class="syntax-symbol">()</span> <span class="syntax-number">3</span>)</span>                  ;Emphasize empty parameter list.
<span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-append">append</a> <span class="syntax-quote">'<span class="syntax-symbol">()</span></span> <span class="syntax-quote">'<span class="syntax-symbol">()</span></span>)</span> <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>→</mi></math> <span class="syntax-symbol">()</span>              ;Emphasize use of empty lists
<span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#function-not">not</a> <a class="section-reference" href="#section-NIL">NIL</a>)</span> <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>→</mi></math> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-true">true</a>                   ;Emphasize use as Boolean false
<span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-10.xhtml#function-get">get</a> <span class="syntax-quote">'<a class="section-reference" href="#section-NIL">NIL</a></span> <span class="syntax-quote">'<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">color</span></span>)</span>                   ;Emphasize use as a symbol
</span></code></pre><br/>A <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-function">function</a> is sometimes said to ``be <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-false">false</a>'' or ``be <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-true">true</a>''
in some circumstance.
Since no <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-function">function</a> object can be the same as <a class="symbol-reference" href="#symbol-nil">nil</a> 
and all <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-function">function</a> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-object">objects</a> represent <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-true">true</a> when viewed as <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-boolean">booleans</a>,
it would be meaningless to say that the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-function">function</a> was literally <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-false">false</a> 
and uninteresting to say that it was literally <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-true">true</a>.
Instead, these phrases are just traditional alternative ways of saying that the
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-function">function</a> ``returns <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-false">false</a>'' or ``returns <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-true">true</a>,'' respectively.<br/></section></section><section id="section-Designators"><h4 class="section-title">Designators</h4><br/>A <span class="newterm">designator</span> is an <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-object">object</a> that denotes another <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-object">object</a>.<br/>Where a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-parameter">parameter</a> of an <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-operator">operator</a> is described as a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-designator">designator</a>,
the description of the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-operator">operator</a> is written in a way that assumes that
the value of the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-parameter">parameter</a> is the denoted <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-object">object</a>;
that is, that the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-parameter">parameter</a> is already of the denoted <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">type</a>.
(The specific nature of the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-object">object</a> denoted by
   a ``<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟨</mi><mi>⟨</mi></math><span class="explicit-italic"> type</span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟩</mi><mi>⟩</mi></math> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-designator">designator</a>''
or a ``<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-designator">designator</a> for a <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟨</mi><mi>⟨</mi></math><span class="explicit-italic"> type</span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟩</mi><mi>⟩</mi></math>'' 
can be found in the Glossary entry for ``<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟨</mi><mi>⟨</mi></math><span class="explicit-italic"> type</span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟩</mi><mi>⟩</mi></math> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-designator">designator</a>.'')<br/>For example, ``<a class="symbol-reference" href="#symbol-nil">nil</a>'' and ``the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-value">value</a> of <a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#variable-*standard-output*">*standard-output*</a>'' are operationally
indistinguishable as <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-stream designator">stream designators</a>.  Similarly, 
the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-symbol">symbol</a> <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">foo</span>
</span></code></pre> and the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-string">string</a> <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-string">"FOO"</span>
</span></code></pre> 
are operationally indistinguishable as <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-string designator">string designators</a>.  <br/>Except as otherwise noted, in a situation where the denoted <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-object">object</a> 
might be used multiple times, it is <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation-dependent">implementation-dependent</a>
whether the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-object">object</a> is coerced only once or whether the coercion occurs
each time the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-object">object</a> must be used.<br/>For example, <a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-mapcar">mapcar</a> receives a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-function designator">function designator</a> as an argument,
and its description is written as if this were simply a function.  In fact, it
is <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation-dependent">implementation-dependent</a> whether the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-function designator">function designator</a> is 
coerced right away or whether it is carried around internally in the form that
it was given as an <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-argument">argument</a> and re-coerced each time it is needed.  In most
cases, <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming program">conforming programs</a> cannot detect the distinction, but there are some 
pathological situations (particularly those involving self-redefining or 
mutually-redefining functions) which do conform and which can detect this difference.
The following program is a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming program">conforming program</a>, but might or might not have
portably correct results, depending on whether its correctness depends on one or
the other of the results:<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-defun">defun</a> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">add-some</span> <span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span>)</span> 
   <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-defun">defun</a> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">add-some</span> <span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span>)</span> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-+">+</a> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-number">2</span>)</span>)</span>
   <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-+">+</a> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-number">1</span>)</span>)</span> <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>→</mi></math> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">ADD-SOME</span>
 <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-mapcar">mapcar</a> <span class="syntax-quote">'<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">add-some</span></span> <span class="syntax-quote">'<span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-number">1</span> <span class="syntax-number">2</span> <span class="syntax-number">3</span> <span class="syntax-number">4</span>)</span></span>)</span>
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>→</mi></math> <span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-number">2</span> <span class="syntax-number">3</span> <span class="syntax-number">4</span> <span class="syntax-number">5</span>)</span>
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mover>or<mi>→</mi></mover></math> <span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-number">2</span> <span class="syntax-number">4</span> <span class="syntax-number">5</span> <span class="syntax-number">6</span>)</span>
</span></code></pre><br/>In a few rare situations, there may be a need in a dictionary entry
to refer to the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-object">object</a> that was the original <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-designator">designator</a>
for a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-parameter">parameter</a>.
Since naming the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-parameter">parameter</a> would refer to the denoted <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-object">object</a>,
the phrase ``the <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟨</mi><mi>⟨</mi></math><span class="explicit-italic"> parameter-name</span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟩</mi><mi>⟩</mi></math> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-designator">designator</a>'' 
can be used to refer to the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-designator">designator</a> which was the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-argument">argument</a>
from which the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-value">value</a> of <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟨</mi><mi>⟨</mi></math><span class="explicit-italic"> parameter-name</span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟩</mi><mi>⟩</mi></math> was computed.<br/></section><section id="section-NonsenseWords"><h4 class="section-title">Nonsense Words</h4><a id="index/code-foo"></a><a id="index/code-bar"></a><a id="index/code-baz"></a><a id="index/code-quux"></a><br/>When a word having no pre-attached semantics is required (<span class="explicit-italic"> e.g.</span>,  in an
example), it is common in the Lisp community to use one of the words
``foo,'' ``bar,'' ``baz,'' and ``quux.''  For example, in<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-defun">defun</a> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">foo</span> <span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span>)</span> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-+">+</a> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">x</span> <span class="syntax-number">1</span>)</span>)</span>
</span></code></pre>
the use of the name <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">foo</span>
</span></code></pre> is just a shorthand way of saying 
``please substitute your favorite name here.''<br/>These nonsense words have gained such prevalance of usage, that it is
commonplace for newcomers to the community to begin to wonder if there
is an attached semantics which they are overlooking&mdash;there is not.<br/></section></section><section id="section-ErrorTerms"><h3 class="section-title">Error Terminology</h3><a id="index/text-error terminology"></a>
<br/>Situations in which errors might, should, or must be signaled are described
in the standard.  The wording used to describe such situations is intended
to have precise meaning. The following list is a glossary of those meanings.<br/><dl><dt><span class="explicit-bold"> Safe code</span></dt><dd><a id="index/term-safe"></a><br/>This is <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-code">code</a> processed with the <span class="declaration-reference error">declaration:safety</span> optimization 
at its highest setting (<pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-number">3</span>
</span></code></pre>).  <span class="declaration-reference error">declaration:safety</span> is a lexical property
of code.  The phrase ``the function <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">F</span>
</span></code></pre> should signal an error'' 
means that if <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">F</span>
</span></code></pre> is invoked from code processed with the highest
<span class="declaration-reference error">declaration:safety</span> optimization, an error is signaled.
It is <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation-dependent">implementation-dependent</a> whether <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">F</span>
</span></code></pre> or the calling 
code signals the error.<br/></dd><dt><span class="explicit-bold"> Unsafe code</span></dt><dd><a id="index/term-unsafe"></a><br/>This is code processed with lower safety levels.<br/>Unsafe code might do error checking.  Implementations are permitted to
treat all code as safe code all the time.<br/></dd><dt><span class="explicit-bold"> An error is signaled</span></dt><dd><a id="index/term-signal"></a><a id="index/text-is signaled"></a><a id="index/text-must signal"></a><br/>This means that an error is signaled in both safe and unsafe code.
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming code">Conforming code</a> may rely on the fact that the error is signaled
in both safe and unsafe code.  Every implementation is required to
detect the error in both safe and unsafe code. For example, ``an error
is signaled if <a class="function-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#function-unexport">unexport</a> is given a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-symbol">symbol</a>
not <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-accessible">accessible</a> in the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-current package">current package</a>.''<br/>If an explicit error type is not specified, the default is <a class="type-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#type-error">error</a>.<br/></dd><dt><span class="explicit-bold"> An error should be signaled</span></dt><dd><a id="index/term-signal"></a><a id="index/text-should signal"></a><br/>This means that an error is signaled in safe code, and an error
might be signaled in unsafe code.  <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming code">Conforming code</a> may rely on the
fact that the error is signaled in safe code.  Every
implementation is required to detect the error at least in safe code.
When the error is not signaled, the ``consequences are undefined''
(see below).  For example, ``<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-+">+</a> should signal an error of <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">type</a> <a class="type-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#type-type-error">type-error</a>
if any argument is not of <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">type</a> <a class="type-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#type-number">number</a>.''<br/></dd><dt><span class="explicit-bold"> Should be prepared to signal an error</span></dt><dd><a id="index/term-signal"></a><a id="index/text-prepared to signal"></a><br/>This is similar to ``should be signaled'' except that it does not
imply that `extra effort' has to be taken on the part of an <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-operator">operator</a>
to discover an erroneous situation if the normal action of that <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-operator">operator</a>
can be performed successfully with only `lazy' checking.
An <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation">implementation</a> is always permitted to signal an error,
but even in <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-safe">safe</a> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-code">code</a>, it is only required to signal the error
when failing to signal it might lead to incorrect results.
In <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-unsafe">unsafe</a> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-code">code</a>, the consequences are undefined.<br/>For example, defining that 
 ``<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-find">find</a> should be prepared to signal an error of <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">type</a> <a class="type-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#type-type-error">type-error</a>
   if its second <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-argument">argument</a> is not a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-proper list">proper list</a>''
does not imply that an error is always signaled.  The <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-form">form</a><br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-find">find</a> <span class="syntax-quote">'<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">a</span></span> <span class="syntax-quote">'<span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">a</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">b</span> <span class="syntax-symbol">.</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">c</span>)</span></span>)</span>
</span></code></pre><br/>must either signal an error of <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">type</a> <a class="type-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#type-type-error">type-error</a> in <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-safe">safe</a> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-code">code</a>,
else return <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">A</span>
</span></code></pre>.
In <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-unsafe">unsafe</a> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-code">code</a>, the consequences are undefined.
By contrast,<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-find">find</a> <span class="syntax-quote">'<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">d</span></span> <span class="syntax-quote">'<span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">a</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">b</span> <span class="syntax-symbol">.</span> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">c</span>)</span></span>)</span>
</span></code></pre><br/>must signal an error of <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">type</a> <a class="type-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#type-type-error">type-error</a> in <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-safe">safe</a> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-code">code</a>.
In <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-unsafe">unsafe</a> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-code">code</a>, the consequences are undefined.
Also,<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-find">find</a> <span class="syntax-quote">'<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">d</span></span> <span class="syntax-quote">'<span class="syntax-feature-expression">#1=(a b . #1#)</span></span>)</span>
</span></code></pre><br/>in <span class="glossary-reference error">glossary:safe code</span>
   might return <a class="symbol-reference" href="#symbol-nil">nil</a> (as an <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation-defined">implementation-defined</a> extension),
   might never return,
or might signal an error of <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">type</a> <a class="type-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#type-type-error">type-error</a>.
In <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-unsafe">unsafe</a> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-code">code</a>, the consequences are undefined.<br/>Typically, the ``should be prepared to signal'' terminology is used in
type checking situations where there are efficiency considerations that
make it impractical to detect errors that are not relevant to the
correct operation of the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-operator">operator</a>.<br/></dd><dt><span class="explicit-bold"> The consequences are unspecified</span></dt><dd><a id="index/text-consequences"></a><a id="index/text-unspecified consequences"></a><br/>This means that the consequences are unpredictable but harmless.
Implementations are permitted to specify the consequences of this
situation. No <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming code">conforming code</a> may depend on the results or effects of
this situation, and all <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming code">conforming code</a> is required to treat the
results and effects of this situation as unpredictable but harmless.
For example, ``if the second argument to <a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-shared-initialize">shared-initialize</a>
specifies a name that does not correspond to any <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-slot">slots</a>
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-accessible">accessible</a> in the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-object">object</a>, the results are unspecified.''<br/></dd><dt><span class="explicit-bold"> The consequences are undefined</span></dt><dd><a id="index/text-consequences"></a><a id="index/text-undefined consequences"></a><br/>This means that the consequences are unpredictable. The consequences
may range from harmless to fatal.  No <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming code">conforming code</a> may depend on
the results or effects. <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming code">Conforming code</a> must treat the consequences as
unpredictable.  In places where the words ``must,'' ``must not,'' or
``may not'' are used, then ``the consequences are undefined'' if the
stated requirement is not met and no specific consequence is
explicitly stated.  An implementation is permitted to signal an error
in this case.<br/>For example: ``Once a name has been declared by <a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-defconstant">defconstant</a>
to be constant, any further assignment or binding of that
variable has undefined consequences.''<br/></dd><dt><span class="explicit-bold"> An error might be signaled</span></dt><dd><a id="index/term-signal"></a><a id="index/text-might signal"></a><br/>This means that the situation has undefined consequences;
however, if an error is signaled, it is of the specified <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">type</a>.
For example, ``<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-open">open</a> might signal an error of <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">type</a> <a class="type-reference" href="chapter-20.xhtml#type-file-error">file-error</a>.''<br/></dd><dt><span class="explicit-bold"> The return values are unspecified</span></dt><dd><a id="index/text-unspecified values"></a><br/>This means that only the number and nature of the return values of a
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-form">form</a> are not specified.  However, the issue of whether or not
any side-effects or transfer of control occurs is still well-specified.<br/>A program can be well-specified even if it uses a function whose
returns values are unspecified.  For example, even if the return
values of some function <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">F</span>
</span></code></pre> are unspecified, an expression such as
<pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-length">length</a> <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-list">list</a> <span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">F</span>)</span>)</span>)</span>
</span></code></pre> is still well-specified because it does not
rely on any particular aspect of the value or values returned by <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">F</span>
</span></code></pre>.<br/></dd><dt><span class="explicit-bold"> Implementations may be extended to cover this situation</span></dt><dd><a id="index/text-extensions"></a><br/>This means that the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-situation">situation</a> has undefined consequences;
however, a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming implementation">conforming implementation</a> is free to treat
the situation in a more specific way.  
For example, an <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation">implementation</a> might define 
    that      an error is signaled,
 or that      an error should be signaled,
 or even that a certain well-defined non-error behavior occurs.<br/>No <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming code">conforming code</a> may depend on the consequences of such a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-situation">situation</a>;
all <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming code">conforming code</a> must treat the consequences of the situation
as undefined. <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation">Implementations</a> are required to document how the
situation is treated.<br/>For example, ``implementations may be extended to define other type
specifiers to have a corresponding <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-class">class</a>.''<br/></dd><dt><span class="explicit-bold"> Implementations are free to extend the syntax</span></dt><dd><a id="index/text-extensions"></a><br/>This means that in this situation implementations are permitted to
define unambiguous extensions to the syntax of the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-form">form</a> being
described.  No <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming code">conforming code</a> may depend on this extension.
Implementations are required to document each such extension. All
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming code">conforming code</a> is required to treat the syntax as meaningless. The
standard might disallow certain extensions while allowing others. For
example, ``no implementation is free to extend the syntax of
<a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#macro-defclass">defclass</a>.''<br/></dd><dt><span class="explicit-bold"> A warning might be issued</span></dt><dd><a id="index/text-warning"></a><br/>This means that <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation">implementations</a> are encouraged to issue a warning
if the context is appropriate (<span class="explicit-italic"> e.g.</span>,  when compiling).  However, a
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming implementation">conforming implementation</a> is not required to issue a warning.
</dd></dl><br/></section><section id="section-RemovableText"><h3 class="section-title">Sections Not Formally Part Of This Standard</h3><br/>
Front matter and back matter, such as the ``Table of Contents,'' 
``Index,'' ``Figures,'' ``Credits,'' and ``Appendix'' are not considered formally 
part of this standard, so that we retain the flexibility needed to update
these sections even at the last minute without fear of needing a formal 
vote to change those parts of the document.  These items are quite short 
and very useful, however, and it is not recommended that they be removed 
even in an abridged version of this document.<br/>Within the concept sections, subsections whose names begin with 
the words ``Note'' or ``Notes'' or ``Example'' or ``Examples'' 
are provided for illustration purposes only, and are not considered
part of the standard.<br/>An attempt has been made to place these sections last in their parent section,
so that they could be removed without disturbing the contiguous numbering of the 
surrounding sections in order to produce a document of smaller size.<br/>Likewise, the ``Examples'' and ``Notes'' sections in a dictionary entry
are not considered part of the standard and could be removed if necessary.<br/>Nevertheless, the examples provide important clarifications and consistency 
checks for the rest of the material, and such abridging is not recommended
unless absolutely unavoidable.<br/></section><section id="section-InterpretingDictionaryEntries"><h3 class="section-title">Interpreting Dictionary Entries</h3><br/>The dictionary entry for each <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-defined name">defined name</a> is partitioned into
sections.  Except as explicitly indicated otherwise below, each section
is introduced by a label identifying that section.  The omission of a
section implies that the section is either not applicable, or would
provide no interesting information.<br/>This section defines the significance of each potential section in a
dictionary entry.<br/><section id="section-The``AffectedBy''SectionofaDictionaryEntry"><h4 class="section-title">The ``Affected By'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</h4>For an <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-operator">operator</a>, anything that can affect the side effects of
or <span class="glossary-reference error">glossary:values</span> returned by the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-operator">operator</a>.<br/>For a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-variable">variable</a>, anything that can affect the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-value">value</a> of the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-variable">variable</a>
including <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-function">functions</a> that bind or assign it.<br/></section><section id="section-The``Arguments''SectionofaDictionaryEntry"><h4 class="section-title">The ``Arguments'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</h4>This information describes the syntax information of entries such as those for
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-declaration">declarations</a> and special <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-expression">expressions</a> which are never <span class="glossary-reference error">glossary:evaluated</span>
as <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-form">forms</a>, and so do not return <span class="glossary-reference error">glossary:values</span>.<br/></section><section id="section-The``ArgumentsandValues''SectionofaDictionaryEntry"><h4 class="section-title">The ``Arguments and Values'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</h4>An English language description of what <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-argument">arguments</a> the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-operator">operator</a> accepts
and what <span class="glossary-reference error">glossary:values</span> it returns, including information about defaults for <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-parameter">parameters</a>
corresponding to omittable <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-argument">arguments</a>
(such as <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-optional parameter">optional parameters</a> and <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-keyword parameter">keyword parameters</a>).
For <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-special operator">special operators</a> and <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-macro">macros</a>,
their <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-argument">arguments</a> are not <span class="glossary-reference error">glossary:evaluated</span> unless it is explicitly stated in their
descriptions that they are <span class="glossary-reference error">glossary:evaluated</span>.<br/>Except as explicitly specified otherwise,
the consequences are undefined if these type restrictions are violated.<br/></section><section id="section-The``BindingTypesAffected''SectionofaDictionaryEntry"><h4 class="section-title">The ``Binding Types Affected'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</h4>This information alerts the reader to the kinds of <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-binding">bindings</a> that might 
potentially be affected by a declaration.  Whether in fact any particular such
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-binding">binding</a> is actually affected is dependent on additional factors as well.
See the ``Description'' section of the declaration in question for details.<br/></section><section id="section-The``ClassPrecedenceList''SectionofaDictionaryEntry"><h4 class="section-title">The ``Class Precedence List'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</h4>This appears in the dictionary entry for a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-class">class</a>,
and contains an ordered list of the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-class">classes</a> defined 
by <span class="explicit-roman">Common Lisp</span> that must be in the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-class precedence list">class precedence list</a> of this <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-class">class</a>.<br/>It is permissible for other (<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation-defined">implementation-defined</a>) <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-class">classes</a>
to appear in the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation">implementation</a>'s <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-class precedence list">class precedence list</a> for the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-class">class</a>.<br/>It is permissible for 
  either <a class="type-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#type-standard-object">standard-object</a>
      or <a class="type-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#type-structure-object">structure-object</a>
to appear in the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation">implementation</a>'s <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-class precedence list">class precedence list</a>;
for details, see <span class="section-reference error">section:TypeRelationships.</span><br/>Except as explicitly indicated otherwise somewhere in this specification,
no additional <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-standardized">standardized</a> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-class">classes</a> may appear in 
the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation">implementation</a>'s <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-class precedence list">class precedence list</a>.<br/>By definition of the relationship between <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-class">classes</a> and <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">types</a>,
the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-class">classes</a> listed in this section are also <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-supertype">supertypes</a> of 
the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">type</a> denoted by the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-class">class</a>.<br/></section><section id="section-TypeSpecEntries"><h4 class="section-title">Dictionary Entries for Type Specifiers</h4><br/>The <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-atomic type specifier">atomic type specifiers</a> are those <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-defined name">defined names</a> 
listed in <span class="figure-reference error">figure:StandardizedAtomicTypeSpecs.</span>
Such dictionary entries are of kind 
``Class,'' ``Condition Type,'' ``System Class,'' or ``Type.''
A description of how to interpret 
a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-symbol">symbol</a> naming one of these <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">types</a> or <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-class">classes</a> 
as an <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-atomic type specifier">atomic type specifier</a>
is found in the ``Description'' section of such dictionary entries.<br/>The <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-compound type specifier">compound type specifiers</a> are those <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-defined name">defined names</a> 
listed in <span class="figure-reference error">figure:StandardizedCompoundTypeSpecNames.</span>
Such dictionary entries are of kind ``Class,'' ``System Class,''
``Type,'' or ``Type Specifier.''
A description of how to interpret as a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-compound type specifier">compound type specifier</a>
a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-list">list</a> whose <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-car">car</a> is such a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-symbol">symbol</a>
is found in the 
     ``Compound Type Specifier Kind,''
     ``Compound Type Specifier Syntax,''
     ``Compound Type Specifier Arguments,''
 and ``Compound Type Specifier Description''
sections of such dictionary entries.<br/><section id="section-The``CompoundTypeSpecifierKind''SectionofaDictionaryEntry"><h5 class="section-title">The ``Compound Type Specifier Kind'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</h5>An ``abbreviating'' <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type specifier">type specifier</a> is one that describes a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-subtype">subtype</a>
for which it is in principle possible to enumerate the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-element">elements</a>,
but for which in practice it is impractical to do so.<br/>A ``specializing'' <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type specifier">type specifier</a> is one that describes a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-subtype">subtype</a>
by restricting the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">type</a> of one or more components of the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">type</a>,
such as <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-element type">element type</a> or <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-complex part type">complex part type</a>.<br/>A ``predicating'' <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type specifier">type specifier</a> is one that describes a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-subtype">subtype</a>
containing only those <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-object">objects</a> that satisfy a given <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-predicate">predicate</a>.<br/>A ``combining'' <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type specifier">type specifier</a> is one that describes a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-subtype">subtype</a>
in a compositional way, using combining operations (such as ``and,'' ``or,'' and
``not'') on other <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">types</a>.<br/></section><section id="section-The``CompoundTypeSpecifierSyntax''SectionofaDictionaryEntry"><h5 class="section-title">The ``Compound Type Specifier Syntax'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</h5>This information about a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">type</a> describes the syntax of a 
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-compound type specifier">compound type specifier</a> for that <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">type</a>.<br/>Whether or not the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">type</a> is acceptable as an <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-atomic type specifier">atomic type specifier</a>
is not represented here; see <span class="section-reference error">section:TypeSpecEntries.</span><br/></section><section id="section-The``CompoundTypeSpecifierArguments''SectionofaDictionaryEntry"><h5 class="section-title">The ``Compound Type Specifier Arguments'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</h5>This information describes <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">type</a> information for the structures defined in
the ``Compound Type Specifier Syntax'' section.<br/></section><section id="section-The``CompoundTypeSpecifierDescription''SectionofaDictionaryEntry"><h5 class="section-title">The ``Compound Type Specifier Description'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</h5>This information describes the meaning of the structures defined in
the ``Compound Type Specifier Syntax'' section.<br/></section></section><section id="section-The``ConstantValue''SectionofaDictionaryEntry"><h4 class="section-title">The ``Constant Value'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</h4>This information describes the unchanging <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">type</a> and <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-value">value</a> of 
a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-constant variable">constant variable</a>.<br/></section><section id="section-The``Description''SectionofaDictionaryEntry"><h4 class="section-title">The ``Description'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</h4>A summary of the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-operator">operator</a> and all intended aspects of the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-operator">operator</a>, 
but does not necessarily include all the fields referenced below it 
(``Side Effects,'' ``Exceptional Situations,'' <span class="explicit-italic"> etc.</span>)<br/></section><section id="section-The``Examples''SectionofaDictionaryEntry"><h4 class="section-title">The ``Examples'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</h4>Examples of use of the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-operator">operator</a>.
These examples are not considered part of the standard;
see <span class="section-reference error">section:RemovableText.</span><br/></section><section id="section-The``ExceptionalSituations''SectionofaDictionaryEntry"><h4 class="section-title">The ``Exceptional Situations'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</h4>Three kinds of information may appear here:
<ul><li>Situations that are detected by the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-function">function</a> and formally signaled.
</li><li>Situations that are handled by the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-function">function</a>.
</li><li>Situations that may be detected by the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-function">function</a>.
</li></ul>
This field does not include conditions that could
be signaled by <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-function">functions</a> passed to and called by this <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-operator">operator</a>
as arguments or through dynamic variables, nor by executing subforms of this
operator if it is a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-macro">macro</a> or <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-special operator">special operator</a>.<br/></section><section id="section-The``InitialValue''SectionofaDictionaryEntry"><h4 class="section-title">The ``Initial Value'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</h4>This information describes the initial <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-value">value</a> of a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-dynamic variable">dynamic variable</a>.
Since this variable might change, see <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">type</a> restrictions in the ``Value Type'' section.<br/></section><section id="section-The``ArgumentPrecedenceOrder''SectionofaDictionaryEntry"><h4 class="section-title">The ``Argument Precedence Order'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</h4>This information describes the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-argument precedence order">argument precedence order</a>.
If it is omitted, the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-argument precedence order">argument precedence order</a> is the default (left to right).<br/></section>
<section id="section-The``MethodSignature''SectionofaDictionaryEntry"><h4 class="section-title">The ``Method Signature'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</h4>The description of a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-generic function">generic function</a> includes descriptions of the
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-method">methods</a> that are defined on that <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-generic function">generic function</a> by the standard.  
A method signature is used to describe the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-parameter">parameters</a> and 
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-parameter specializer">parameter specializers</a> for each <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-method">method</a>. 
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-method">Methods</a> defined for the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-generic function">generic function</a> must be of the form described
by the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-method">method</a> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-signature">signature</a>. <br/><span class="method"><span class="name">F</span>&nbsp;<span class="lambda-list"><span class="explicit-roman">(</span><span class="parameter">x</span> <span class="parameter">class</span><span class="explicit-roman">)</span>
	      <span class="explicit-roman">(</span><span class="parameter">y</span> t<span class="explicit-roman">)</span>
	      <span class="lambda-list-keyword">&amp;optional</span> <span class="parameter">z</span> <span class="lambda-list-keyword">&amp;key</span> <span class="parameter">k</span></span></span><br/><br/> This <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-signature">signature</a> indicates that this method on the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-generic function">generic function</a>
<span class="explicit-bold"> F</span> has two <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-required parameter">required parameters</a>:
     <span class="parameter">x</span>, which must be a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-generalized instance">generalized instance</a> of the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-class">class</a> <span class="parameter">class</span>;
 and <span class="parameter">y</span>, which can  be any <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-object">object</a> 
       (<span class="explicit-italic"> i.e.</span>,  a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-generalized instance">generalized instance</a> of the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-class">class</a> <a class="type-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#type-t">t</a>).
In addition, there is an <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-optional parameter">optional parameter</a> <span class="parameter">z</span> and a
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-keyword parameter">keyword parameter</a> <span class="parameter">k</span>.  This <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-signature">signature</a> also indicates that this
method on <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">F</span>
</span></code></pre> is a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-primary method">primary method</a> and has no <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-qualifier">qualifiers</a>.<br/>For each <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-parameter">parameter</a>, the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-argument">argument</a> supplied must be in the
intersection of the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">type</a> specified in the description of the
corresponding <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-generic function">generic function</a> and the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">type</a> given in 
the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-signature">signature</a> of some <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-method">method</a> (including not only those 
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-method">methods</a> defined in this specification, but also
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation-defined">implementation-defined</a> or user-defined <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-method">methods</a> in situations
where the definition of such <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-method">methods</a> is permitted).<br/></section><section id="section-The``Name''SectionofaDictionaryEntry"><h4 class="section-title">The ``Name'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</h4>This section introduces the dictionary entry.  It is not explicitly labeled.
It appears preceded and followed by a horizontal bar.<br/>In large print at left, the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-defined name">defined name</a> appears; if more than one
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-defined name">defined name</a> is to be described by the entry, all such <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-name">names</a> 
are shown separated by commas.<br/>In somewhat smaller italic print at right is an indication of what kind
of dictionary entry this is.  Possible values are:<br/><dl><dt><span class="explicit-italic"> Accessor</span></dt><dd>This is an <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-accessor">accessor</a> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-function">function</a>.<br/></dd><dt><span class="explicit-italic"> Class</span></dt><dd>This is a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-class">class</a>.<br/></dd><dt><span class="explicit-italic"> Condition Type</span></dt><dd>This is a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-subtype">subtype</a> of <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">type</a> <a class="type-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#type-condition">condition</a>.

</dd><dt><span class="explicit-italic"> Constant Variable</span></dt><dd>This is a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-constant variable">constant variable</a>.<br/></dd><dt><span class="explicit-italic"> Declaration</span></dt><dd>This is a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-declaration identifier">declaration identifier</a>.<br/></dd><dt><span class="explicit-italic"> Function</span></dt><dd>This is a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-function">function</a>.<br/></dd><dt><span class="explicit-italic"> Local Function</span></dt><dd>This is a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-function">function</a> that is defined only lexically within the scope of some
other <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-macro form">macro form</a>.<br/></dd><dt><span class="explicit-italic"> Local Macro</span></dt><dd>This is a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-macro">macro</a> that is defined only lexically within the scope of some
other <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-macro form">macro form</a>.<br/></dd><dt><span class="explicit-italic"> Macro</span></dt><dd>This is a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-macro">macro</a>.<br/></dd><dt><span class="explicit-italic"> Restart</span></dt><dd>This is a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-restart">restart</a>.<br/></dd><dt><span class="explicit-italic"> Special Operator</span></dt><dd>This is a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-special operator">special operator</a>.<br/></dd><dt><span class="explicit-italic"> Standard Generic Function</span></dt><dd>This is a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-standard generic function">standard generic function</a>.<br/></dd><dt><span class="explicit-italic"> Symbol</span></dt><dd>This is a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-symbol">symbol</a> that is specially recognized in some particular situation,
such as the syntax of a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-macro">macro</a>.<br/></dd><dt><span class="explicit-italic"> System Class</span></dt><dd>This is like <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-class">class</a>, but it identifies a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-class">class</a> that is potentially
a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-built-in class">built-in class</a>.  (No <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-class">class</a> is actually required to be a
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-built-in class">built-in class</a>.)<br/></dd><dt><span class="explicit-italic"> Type</span></dt><dd>This is an <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-atomic type specifier">atomic type specifier</a>,
and depending on information for each particular entry,
may subject to form other <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type specifier">type specifiers</a>.<br/></dd><dt><span class="explicit-italic"> Type Specifier</span></dt><dd>This is a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-defined name">defined name</a> that is not an <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-atomic type specifier">atomic type specifier</a>,
but that can be used in constructing valid <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type specifier">type specifiers</a>.<br/></dd><dt><span class="explicit-italic"> Variable</span></dt><dd>This is a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-dynamic variable">dynamic variable</a>.<br/></dd></dl><br/></section><section id="section-The``Notes''SectionofaDictionaryEntry"><h4 class="section-title">The ``Notes'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</h4>Information not found elsewhere in this description
which pertains to this <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-operator">operator</a>.
Among other things, this might include 
 cross reference information,
 code equivalences, 
 stylistic hints,
 implementation hints,
 typical uses.
This information is not considered part of the standard;
any <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming implementation">conforming implementation</a> or <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming program">conforming program</a>
is permitted to ignore the presence of this information.<br/></section><section id="section-The``Pronunciation''SectionofaDictionaryEntry"><h4 class="section-title">The ``Pronunciation'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</h4>This offers a suggested pronunciation for <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-defined name">defined names</a> 
so that people not in verbal communication with the original designers
can figure out how to pronounce words that are not in normal English usage.
This information is advisory only, and is not considered part of the standard.
For brevity, it is only provided for entries with names that are specific to
<span class="explicit-roman">Common Lisp</span> and would not be found in <span class="explicit-italic"> Webster's Third New International Dictionary
 the English Language, Unabridged</span>.<br/></section><section id="section-The``SeeAlso''SectionofaDictionaryEntry"><h4 class="section-title">The ``See Also'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</h4>List of references to other parts of this standard
that offer information relevant to this <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-operator">operator</a>. 
This list is not part of the standard.<br/></section><section id="section-The``SideEffects''SectionofaDictionaryEntry"><h4 class="section-title">The ``Side Effects'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</h4>Anything that is changed as a result of the
evaluation of the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-form">form</a> containing this <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-operator">operator</a>.<br/></section><section id="section-The``Supertypes''SectionofaDictionaryEntry"><h4 class="section-title">The ``Supertypes'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</h4>This appears in the dictionary entry for a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">type</a>,
and contains a list of the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-standardized">standardized</a> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">types</a> 
that must be <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-supertype">supertypes</a> of this <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">type</a>.<br/>In <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation">implementations</a> where there is a corresponding <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-class">class</a>,
the order of the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-class">classes</a> in the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-class precedence list">class precedence list</a> 
is consistent with the order presented in this section.<br/></section><section id="section-The``Syntax''SectionofaDictionaryEntry"><h4 class="section-title">The ``Syntax'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</h4>This section describes how to use the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-defined name">defined name</a> in code.
The ``Syntax'' description for a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-generic function">generic function</a> 
describes the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-lambda list">lambda list</a> of the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-generic function">generic function</a> itself, 
while the ``Method Signatures'' describe the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-lambda list">lambda lists</a> 
of the defined <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-method">methods</a>.
The ``Syntax'' description for 
     an <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-ordinary function">ordinary function</a>,
     a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-macro">macro</a>,
  or a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-special operator">special operator</a>
describes its <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-parameter">parameters</a>.<br/>For example, an <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-operator">operator</a> description might say:<br/><span class="function-definition"><span class="name">F</span>&nbsp;<span class="lambda-list">x y <span class="lambda-list-keyword">&amp;optional</span> z <span class="lambda-list-keyword">&amp;key</span> k</span>&nbsp;→&nbsp;|</span><br/> This description indicates that the function <span class="explicit-bold"> F</span> 
has two required parameters, <span class="parameter">x</span> and <span class="parameter">y</span>.  In addition,
there is an optional parameter <span class="parameter">z</span> and a keyword parameter <span class="parameter">k</span>.<br/>For <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-macro">macros</a> and <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-special operator">special operators</a>, syntax is given 
in modified BNF notation; see <span class="section-reference error">section:ModifiedBNF.</span>
For <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-function">functions</a> a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-lambda list">lambda list</a> is given.
In both cases, however, the outermost parentheses are omitted,
and default value information is omitted.<br/><section id="section-Special``Syntax''NotationsforOverloadedOperators"><h5 class="section-title">Special ``Syntax'' Notations for Overloaded Operators</h5>If two descriptions exist for the same operation but with different numbers of
arguments, then the extra arguments are to be treated as optional.  For example,
this pair of lines:<br/><span class="function-definition"><span class="name">file-position</span>&nbsp;<span class="lambda-list">stream</span>&nbsp;→&nbsp;<span class="return-values">position</span></span><br/>
<span class="function-definition"><span class="name">file-position</span>&nbsp;<span class="lambda-list">stream position-spec</span>&nbsp;→&nbsp;<span class="return-values">success-p</span></span><br/><br/> is operationally equivalent to this line:<br/><span class="function-definition"><span class="name">file-position</span>&nbsp;<span class="lambda-list">stream <span class="lambda-list-keyword">&amp;optional</span> position-spec</span>&nbsp;→&nbsp;<span class="return-values">result</span></span><br/><br/> and differs only in that it provides on opportunity to introduce different
names for <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-parameter">parameter</a> and <span class="glossary-reference error">glossary:values</span> for each case.
The separated (multi-line) notation is used when an <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-operator">operator</a> is overloaded in
such a way that the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-parameter">parameters</a> are used in different ways
depending on how many <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-argument">arguments</a> are supplied (<span class="explicit-italic"> e.g.</span>,  for the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-function">function</a> <a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-/">/</a>)
or the return values are different in the two cases (<span class="explicit-italic"> e.g.</span>,  for the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-function">function</a> <a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-file-position">file-position</a>).<br/></section><section id="section-NamingConventionsforRestParameters"><h5 class="section-title">Naming Conventions for Rest Parameters</h5>Within this specification, 
if the name of a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-rest parameter">rest parameter</a> is chosen to be a plural noun,
use of that name in <span class="parameter">parameter</span> font refers
to the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-list">list</a> to which the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-rest parameter">rest parameter</a> is bound.
Use of the singular form of that name in <span class="parameter">parameter</span> font refers 
to an <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-element">element</a> of that <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-list">list</a>.<br/>For example, given a syntax description such as:<br/><span class="function-definition"><span class="name">F</span>&nbsp;<span class="lambda-list"><span class="lambda-list-keyword">&amp;rest</span> <span class="parameter">arguments</span></span>&nbsp;→&nbsp;|</span><br/> it is appropriate to refer either to the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-rest parameter">rest parameter</a> named
<span class="parameter">arguments</span> by name, or to one of its elements by speaking of ``an <span class="parameter">argument</span>,''
``some <span class="parameter">argument</span>,'' ``each <span class="parameter">argument</span>'' <span class="explicit-italic"> etc.</span><br/></section><section id="section-RequiringNon-NullRestParametersinthe``Syntax''Section"><h5 class="section-title">Requiring Non-Null Rest Parameters in the ``Syntax'' Section</h5>In some cases it is useful to refer to all arguments equally as a single
aggregation using a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-rest parameter">rest parameter</a> while at the same time
requiring at least one argument.  A variety of imperative and
declarative means are available in <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-code">code</a> for expressing such a
restriction, however they generally do not manifest themselves in a
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-lambda list">lambda list</a>.  For descriptive purposes within this specification,<br/><span class="function-definition"><span class="name">F</span>&nbsp;<span class="lambda-list"><span class="lambda-list-keyword">&amp;rest</span> <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">\hboxarguments<msup><mrow/><mo>+</mo></msup></math></span>&nbsp;→&nbsp;|</span><br/> means the same as<br/><span class="function-definition"><span class="name">F</span>&nbsp;<span class="lambda-list"><span class="lambda-list-keyword">&amp;rest</span> arguments</span>&nbsp;→&nbsp;|</span><br/> but introduces the additional requirement that there be 
at least one <span class="parameter">argument</span>.<br/></section><section id="section-Returnvaluesinthe``Syntax''Section"><h5 class="section-title">Return values in the ``Syntax'' Section</h5>An evaluation arrow ``<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>→</mi></math>'' precedes a list of <span class="glossary-reference error">glossary:values</span> to be returned.
For example:<br/><span class="function-definition"><span class="name">F</span>&nbsp;<span class="lambda-list">a b c</span>&nbsp;→&nbsp;<span class="return-values">x</span></span><br/><br/> indicates that <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">F</span>
</span></code></pre> is an operator that has three <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-required parameter">required parameters</a>
(<span class="explicit-italic"> i.e.</span>,  <span class="parameter">a</span>, <span class="parameter">b</span>, and <span class="parameter">c</span>) and that returns one <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-value">value</a> (<span class="explicit-italic"> i.e.</span>,  <span class="parameter">x</span>).
If more than one <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-value">value</a> is returned by an operator, the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-name">names</a> of the
<span class="glossary-reference error">glossary:values</span> are separated by commas, as in:<br/><span class="function-definition"><span class="name">F</span>&nbsp;<span class="lambda-list">a b c</span>&nbsp;→&nbsp;<span class="return-values">x, y, z</span></span><br/><br/><section id="section-NoArgumentsorValuesinthe``Syntax''Section"><h6 class="section-title">No Arguments or Values in the ``Syntax'' Section</h6>If no <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-argument">arguments</a> are permitted, or no <span class="glossary-reference error">glossary:values</span> are returned, 
a special notation is used to make this more visually apparent.  For example,<br/><span class="function-definition"><span class="name">F</span>&nbsp;<span class="lambda-list"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟨</mi></math><span class="explicit-italic"> no <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-argument">arguments</a></span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟩</mi></math></span>&nbsp;→&nbsp;<span class="return-values"><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟨</mi></math><span class="explicit-italic"> no <span class="glossary-reference error">glossary:values</span></span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟩</mi></math></span></span><br/><br/>indicates that <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">F</span>
</span></code></pre> is an operator that accepts no <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-argument">arguments</a> and returns
no <span class="glossary-reference error">glossary:values</span>.<br/></section><section id="section-UnconditionalTransferofControlinthe``Syntax''Section"><h6 class="section-title">Unconditional Transfer of Control in the ``Syntax'' Section</h6>Some <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-operator">operators</a> perform an unconditional transfer of control, and
so never have any return values.  Such <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-operator">operators</a> are notated using
a notation such as the following:<br/><span class="function-definition"><span class="name">F</span>&nbsp;<span class="lambda-list">a b c</span>&nbsp;→&nbsp;|</span><br/></section></section></section><section id="section-The``ValidContext''SectionofaDictionaryEntry"><h4 class="section-title">The ``Valid Context'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</h4>This information is used by dictionary entries such as ``Declarations''
in order to restrict the context in which the declaration may appear.<br/>A given ``Declaration'' might appear in 
     a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-declaration">declaration</a> (<span class="explicit-italic"> i.e.</span>,  a <a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#symbol-declare">declare</a> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-expression">expression</a>),
     a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-proclamation">proclamation</a> (<span class="explicit-italic"> i.e.</span>,  a <a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#macro-declaim">declaim</a> or <a class="function-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#function-proclaim">proclaim</a> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-form">form</a>),
  or both.<br/></section><section id="section-The``ValueType''SectionofaDictionaryEntry"><h4 class="section-title">The ``Value Type'' Section of a Dictionary Entry</h4>This information describes any <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-type">type</a> restrictions on a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-dynamic variable">dynamic variable</a>.<br/>Except as explicitly specified otherwise,
the consequences are undefined if this type restriction is violated.<br/></section></section>
</section><section id="section-Conformance"><h2 class="section-title">Conformance</h2>

This standard presents the syntax and semantics to be implemented by a
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming implementation">conforming implementation</a> (and its accompanying documentation).
In addition, it imposes requirements on <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming program">conforming programs</a>.<br/><section id="section-ConformingImplementations"><h3 class="section-title">Conforming Implementations</h3>A <span class="newterm">conforming implementation</span> shall adhere to the requirements outlined
in this section.<br/><section id="section-ReqLangFeatures"><h4 class="section-title">Required Language Features</h4><br/>A <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming implementation">conforming implementation</a> shall accept all features 
(including deprecated features)
of the language specified in this standard,
with the meanings defined in this standard.<br/>A <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming implementation">conforming implementation</a> shall not require the inclusion of substitute
or additional language elements in code in order to accomplish a feature of
the language that is specified in this standard.<br/></section><section id="section-DocumentationofImplementation-DependentFeatures"><h4 class="section-title">Documentation of Implementation-Dependent Features</h4>A <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming implementation">conforming implementation</a> shall be accompanied by a document
that provides a definition of all <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation-defined">implementation-defined</a>
aspects of the language defined by this specification.<br/>In addition, a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming implementation">conforming implementation</a> is encouraged (but not required) 
to document items in this standard that are identified as
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation-dependent">implementation-dependent</a>, although in some cases
such documentation might simply identify the item as ``undefined.''<br/></section><section id="section-DocumentationofExtensions"><h4 class="section-title">Documentation of Extensions</h4>A <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming implementation">conforming implementation</a> shall be accompanied by a
document that separately describes any features accepted by the
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation">implementation</a> that are not specified in this standard, but that do not
cause any ambiguity or contradiction when added to the language
standard.  Such extensions shall be described as being ``extensions to
<span class="explicit-roman">Common Lisp</span> as specified by ANSI <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟨</mi><mi>⟨</mi></math><span class="explicit-italic"> standard number</span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟩</mi><mi>⟩</mi></math>.''<br/></section><section id="section-TreatmentofExceptionalSituations"><h4 class="section-title">Treatment of Exceptional Situations</h4>A <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming implementation">conforming implementation</a> shall treat exceptional situations 
in a manner consistent with this specification.<br/><section id="section-ResolutionofApparentConflictsinExceptionalSituations"><h5 class="section-title">Resolution of Apparent Conflicts in Exceptional Situations</h5>If more than one passage in this specification appears to apply to the
same situation but in conflicting ways, the passage that appears
to describe the situation in the most specific way (not necessarily the
passage that provides the most constrained kind of error detection) 
takes precedence.<br/><section id="section-ExamplesofResolutionofApparentConflicts&#10;&#9;&#9;&#9;inExceptionalSituations"><h6 class="section-title">Examples of Resolution of Apparent Conflicts 
			  in Exceptional Situations</h6>Suppose that function <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">foo</span>
</span></code></pre> is a member of a set <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">S</math> of <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-function">functions</a> that
operate on numbers.  Suppose that one passage states that an error must be
signaled if any <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-function">function</a> in <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">S</math> is ever given an argument of <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-number">17</span>
</span></code></pre>.
Suppose that an apparently conflicting passage states that the consequences 
are undefined if <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">foo</span>
</span></code></pre> receives an argument of <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-number">17</span>
</span></code></pre>.  Then the second passage
(the one specifically about <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">foo</span>
</span></code></pre>) would dominate because the description of
the situational context is the most specific, and it would not be required that
<pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">foo</span>
</span></code></pre> signal an error on an argument of <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-number">17</span>
</span></code></pre> even though other functions in 
the set <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">S</math> would be required to do so.<br/></section></section></section><section id="section-ConformanceStatement"><h4 class="section-title">Conformance Statement</h4>A <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming implementation">conforming implementation</a> shall produce a conformance statement 
as a consequence of using the implementation, or that statement
shall be included in the accompanying documentation.  If the implementation
conforms in all respects with this standard, the conformance statement
shall be<br/><ul><li>``<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟨</mi><mi>⟨</mi></math><span class="explicit-italic"> Implementation</span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟩</mi><mi>⟩</mi></math> conforms with the requirements 
	  of ANSI <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟨</mi><mi>⟨</mi></math><span class="explicit-italic"> standard number</span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟩</mi><mi>⟩</mi></math>''
</li></ul><br/>If the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation">implementation</a> conforms with some but not all of the requirements of this
standard, then the conformance statement shall be<br/><ul><li>``<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟨</mi><mi>⟨</mi></math><span class="explicit-italic"> Implementation</span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟩</mi><mi>⟩</mi></math> conforms with the requirements of
	  ANSI <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟨</mi><mi>⟨</mi></math><span class="explicit-italic"> standard number</span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟩</mi><mi>⟩</mi></math> with the following exceptions: 
	  <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟨</mi><mi>⟨</mi></math><span class="explicit-italic"> reference to or complete list of the requirements of
		   the standard with which the implementation does not conform</span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟩</mi><mi>⟩</mi></math>.''
</li></ul> <br/></section></section><section id="section-ConformingPrograms"><h3 class="section-title">Conforming Programs</h3><a id="index/term-conforming program"></a><a id="index/term-conforming code"></a><br/>Code conforming with the requirements of this standard shall adhere to the
following:<br/><ol><li><a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming code">Conforming code</a> shall use only those features of the
               language syntax and semantics that are 
	       either specified in this standard
		   or defined using the extension mechanisms 
		      specified in the standard.
 <br/></li><li><a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming code">Conforming code</a> may use
	      <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation-dependent">implementation-dependent</a> features and values, 
	      but shall not rely upon
	      any particular interpretation of these features and values 
	      other than those that are discovered by the execution of <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-code">code</a>.<br/></li><li><a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming code">Conforming code</a> shall not depend on the consequences
	      of undefined or unspecified situations.<br/></li><li><a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming code">Conforming code</a> does not use any constructions 
	      that are prohibited by the standard.<br/></li><li><a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming code">Conforming code</a> does not depend on extensions 
	      included in an implementation.
</li></ol> <br/>
<section id="section-UseofImplementation-DefinedLanguageFeatures"><h4 class="section-title">Use of Implementation-Defined Language Features</h4>Note that <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming code">conforming code</a> may rely on particular
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation-defined">implementation-defined</a> values or features. Also note that the
requirements for <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming code">conforming code</a> and <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming implementation">conforming implementations</a> do not
require that the results produced by conforming code always be the
same when processed by a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming implementation">conforming implementation</a>. The results may be the
same, or they may differ.<br/>
 
Conforming code may run in all conforming implementations, but might
have allowable <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation-defined">implementation-defined</a> behavior that makes it
non-portable code.
For example, the following are examples of <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-form">forms</a> that are conforming, but
that might return different <span class="glossary-reference error">glossary:values</span> in different implementations:<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-evenp">evenp</a> <a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-most-positive-fixnum">most-positive-fixnum</a>)</span> <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>→</mi></math> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation-dependent">implementation-dependent</a>
<span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-random">random</a>)</span> <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>→</mi></math> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation-dependent">implementation-dependent</a>
<span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-&gt;">&gt;</a> <a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#constant-lambda-parameters-limit">lambda-parameters-limit</a> <span class="syntax-number">93</span>)</span> <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>→</mi></math> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation-dependent">implementation-dependent</a>
<span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-char-name">char-name</a> <span class="syntax-character">#\A</span>)</span> <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>→</mi></math> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation-dependent">implementation-dependent</a>
</span></code></pre> <br/><section id="section-ReadTimeConditionals"><h5 class="section-title">Use of Read-Time Conditionals</h5><br/>
Use of <pre><code><span class="syntax-root">#+
</span></code></pre> and <pre><code><span class="syntax-root">#-
</span></code></pre> does not automatically disqualify a program
from being conforming.  A program which uses <pre><code><span class="syntax-root">#+
</span></code></pre> and <pre><code><span class="syntax-root">#-
</span></code></pre> is 
considered conforming if there is no set of <span class="glossary-reference error">glossary:features</span> in which the
program would not be conforming.  Of course, <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming program">conforming programs</a> are
not necessarily working programs.  The following program is conforming:<br/><pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-defun">defun</a> <span class="syntax-interned-symbol">foo</span> <span class="syntax-symbol">()</span>
  #+ACME <span class="syntax-cons">(<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">acme:initialize-something</span>)</span>
  <span class="syntax-cons">(<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#function-print">print</a> <span class="syntax-quote">'<span class="syntax-interned-symbol">hello-there</span></span>)</span>)</span>
</span></code></pre><br/>However, this program might or might not work, depending on whether the
presence of the feature <pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">ACME</span>
</span></code></pre> really implies that a function named
<pre><code><span class="syntax-root"><span class="syntax-interned-symbol">acme:initialize-something</span>
</span></code></pre> is present in the environment.  In effect,
using <pre><code><span class="syntax-root">#+
</span></code></pre> or <pre><code><span class="syntax-root">#-
</span></code></pre> in a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming program">conforming program</a> means that the variable
<a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-24.xhtml#variable-*features*">*features*</a><a id="symbol-*features*"></a>
becomes just one more piece of input data to that 
program.  Like any other data coming into a program, the programmer
is responsible for assuring that the program does not make unwarranted
assumptions on the basis of input data.<br/></section></section><section id="section-CharacterSetforPortableCode"><h4 class="section-title">Character Set for Portable Code</h4><span class="glossary-reference error">glossary:Portable code</span> is written using only <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-standard character">standard characters</a>.<br/></section></section>
</section><section id="section-LanguageExtensions"><h2 class="section-title">Language Extensions</h2>

 
A language extension is any documented <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-implementation-defined">implementation-defined</a> behavior
of a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-defined name">defined name</a> in this standard that varies from the
behavior described in this standard, or a documented consequence of a
situation that the standard specifies as undefined, unspecified, or
extendable by the implementation.  For example, if this standard says
that ``the results are unspecified,'' an extension would be to specify
the results.<br/>
If the correct behavior of a program depends on the results provided
by an extension, only implementations with the same extension will
execute the program correctly.  Note that such a program might be
non-conforming.  Also, if this standard says that ``an implementation
may be extended,'' a conforming, but possibly non-portable, program
can be written using an extension.<br/>An implementation can have extensions, provided they do not alter the
behavior of conforming code and provided they are not explicitly
prohibited by this standard.<br/>          
The term ``extension'' refers only to extensions available upon
startup.  An implementation is free to allow or prohibit redefinition
of an extension.<br/>The following list contains specific guidance to implementations 
concerning certain types of extensions.
<dl><dt><span class="explicit-bold"> Extra return values</span></dt><dd> 
An implementation must return exactly
the number of return values specified by this standard unless the
standard specifically indicates otherwise.


</dd><dt><span class="explicit-bold"> Unsolicited messages</span></dt><dd> 
No output can be produced by a function other than that specified in
the standard or due to the signaling of <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-condition">conditions</a>
detected by the function.<br/>Unsolicited output, such as garbage collection notifications and
autoload heralds, should not go directly to the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-stream">stream</a>
that is the value of a <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-stream">stream</a> variable defined in this
standard, but can go indirectly to <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-terminal i/o">terminal I/O</a> by using a
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-synonym stream">synonym stream</a> to <a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#variable-*terminal-io*">*terminal-io*</a>.<br/>Progress reports from such functions as <a class="function-reference" href="chapter-24.xhtml#function-load">load</a> and
<a class="function-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#function-compile">compile</a> are considered solicited, and are not covered by
this prohibition.<br/> 
</dd><dt><span class="explicit-bold"> Implementation of macros and special forms</span></dt><dd>
<a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-macro">Macros</a> and <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-special operator">special operators</a> defined in this standard
must not be <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-function">functions</a>.
 <br/></dd></dl>

</section><section id="section-LanguageSubsets"><h2 class="section-title">Language Subsets</h2>

The language described in this standard contains no subsets,
though subsets are not forbidden.

For a language to be considered a subset,
it must have the property that any valid <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-program">program</a> in that language
has equivalent semantics and will run directly
(with no extralingual pre-processing, and no special compatibility packages)
in any <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming implementation">conforming implementation</a> of the full language.<br/>A language that conforms to this requirement shall be described
as being a ``subset of <span class="explicit-roman">Common Lisp</span> as specified by ANSI <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟨</mi><mi>⟨</mi></math><span class="explicit-italic"> standard number</span><math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><mi>⟩</mi><mi>⟩</mi></math>.''

</section><section id="section-DeprecatedFeatures"><h2 class="section-title">Deprecated Language Features</h2>

Deprecated language features are not expected to appear in future <span class="explicit-roman">Common Lisp</span>
standards, but are required to be implemented for conformance with this
standard; see <span class="section-reference error">section:ReqLangFeatures.</span><br/><a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-conforming program">Conforming programs</a> can use deprecated features;
however, it is considered good programming style to avoid them.
It is permissible for the compiler to produce <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-style warning">style warnings</a> 
about the use of such features at compile time, 
but there should be no such warnings at program execution time.<br/><section id="section-DeprecatedFunctions"><h3 class="section-title">Deprecated Functions</h3>The <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-function">functions</a> in Figure <span class="explicit-mono">()</span>&ndash; are deprecated.
<span class="float" id="figure-Deprecated Functions"><table><tbody><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-assoc-if-not">assoc-if-not</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-nsubst-if-not">nsubst-if-not</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-24.xhtml#function-require">require</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-count-if-not">count-if-not</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-nsubstitute-if-not">nsubstitute-if-not</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-10.xhtml#function-set">set</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-delete-if-not">delete-if-not</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-position-if-not">position-if-not</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-subst-if-not">subst-if-not</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-find-if-not">find-if-not</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-24.xhtml#function-provide">provide</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-substitute-if-not">substitute-if-not</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-10.xhtml#function-gentemp">gentemp</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-rassoc-if-not">rassoc-if-not</a></td><td/></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-member-if-not">member-if-not</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-remove-if-not">remove-if-not</a></td><td/></tr></tbody></table><div class="caption">Deprecated Functions</div></span>

</section><section id="section-DeprecatedArgumentConventions"><h3 class="section-title">Deprecated Argument Conventions</h3>The ability to pass a numeric <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-argument">argument</a> to <a class="function-reference" href="chapter-10.xhtml#function-gensym">gensym</a> has been deprecated.

The <span class="keyword">:test-not</span> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-argument">argument</a> to the <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-function">functions</a> in Figure <span class="explicit-mono">()</span>&ndash; are deprecated.<br/><span class="float" id="figure-Functions with Deprecated :TEST-NOT Arguments"><table><tbody><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-adjoin">adjoin</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-nset-difference">nset-difference</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-search">search</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-assoc">assoc</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-nset-exclusive-or">nset-exclusive-or</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-set-difference">set-difference</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-count">count</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-nsublis">nsublis</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-set-exclusive-or">set-exclusive-or</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-delete">delete</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-nsubst">nsubst</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-sublis">sublis</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-delete-duplicates">delete-duplicates</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-nsubstitute">nsubstitute</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-subsetp">subsetp</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-find">find</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-nunion">nunion</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-subst">subst</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-intersection">intersection</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-position">position</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-substitute">substitute</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-member">member</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-rassoc">rassoc</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-tree-equal">tree-equal</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-mismatch">mismatch</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-remove">remove</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-union">union</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-nintersection">nintersection</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-remove-duplicates">remove-duplicates</a></td><td/></tr></tbody></table><div class="caption">Functions with Deprecated :TEST-NOT Arguments</div></span>
The use of the situation names <a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#symbol-compile">compile</a>, <a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#symbol-load">load</a>, and <a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-2.xhtml#symbol-eval">eval</a>
in <a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#special-operator-eval-when">eval-when</a> is deprecated.

</section><section id="section-DeprecatedVariables"><h3 class="section-title">Deprecated Variables</h3>The <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-variable">variable</a> <a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-24.xhtml#variable-*modules*">*modules*</a> is deprecated.

</section><section id="section-DeprecatedReaderSyntax"><h3 class="section-title">Deprecated Reader Syntax</h3>The <pre><code><span class="syntax-root">#S
</span></code></pre> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-reader macro">reader macro</a> forces keyword names into the <a class="package-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#package-keyword">keyword</a> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-package">package</a>;
see <span class="section-reference error">section:SharpsignS.</span>
This feature is deprecated;
in the future, keyword names will be taken in the package they are read in,
so <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-symbol">symbols</a> that are actually in the <a class="package-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#package-keyword">keyword</a> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-package">package</a>
should be used if that is what is desired.

</section>
</section><section id="section-CLsymbols"><h2 class="section-title">Symbols in the COMMON-LISP Package</h2>

The figures on the next twelve pages contain a complete enumeration
of the 978 <span class="glossary-reference error">glossary:external</span> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-symbol">symbols</a> in the <a class="package-reference" href="#package-common-lisp">common-lisp</a> <a class="glossary-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#glossary-package">package</a>.<a id="package-common-lisp"></a><br/>
<span class="float" id="figure-Symbols in the COMMON-LISP package (part one of twelve)."><table><tbody><tr><td><a class="lambda-list-keyword-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#lambda-list-keyword-allow-other-keys">allow-other-keys</a></td><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#variable-*print-miser-width*">*print-miser-width*</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="lambda-list-keyword-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#lambda-list-keyword-aux">aux</a></td><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#variable-*print-pprint-dispatch*">*print-pprint-dispatch*</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="lambda-list-keyword-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#lambda-list-keyword-body">body</a></td><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#variable-*print-pretty*">*print-pretty*</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="lambda-list-keyword-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#lambda-list-keyword-environment">environment</a></td><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#variable-*print-radix*">*print-radix*</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="lambda-list-keyword-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#lambda-list-keyword-key">key</a></td><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#variable-*print-readably*">*print-readably*</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="lambda-list-keyword-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#lambda-list-keyword-optional">optional</a></td><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#variable-*print-right-margin*">*print-right-margin*</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="lambda-list-keyword-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#lambda-list-keyword-rest">rest</a></td><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#variable-*query-io*">*query-io*</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="lambda-list-keyword-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#lambda-list-keyword-whole">whole</a></td><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#variable-*random-state*">*random-state*</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-*">*</a></td><td><a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-2.xhtml#symbol-*read-base*">*read-base*</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#variable-**">**</a></td><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-23.xhtml#variable-*read-default-float-format*">*read-default-float-format*</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#variable-***">***</a></td><td><a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-2.xhtml#symbol-*read-eval*">*read-eval*</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#variable-*break-on-signals*">*break-on-signals*</a></td><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-23.xhtml#variable-*read-suppress*">*read-suppress*</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-24.xhtml#variable-*compile-file-pathname*">*compile-file-pathname*</a></td><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-23.xhtml#variable-*readtable*">*readtable*</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-24.xhtml#variable-*compile-file-truename*">*compile-file-truename*</a></td><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#variable-*standard-input*">*standard-input*</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-24.xhtml#variable-*compile-print*">*compile-print*</a></td><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#variable-*standard-output*">*standard-output*</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-24.xhtml#variable-*compile-verbose*">*compile-verbose*</a></td><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#variable-*terminal-io*">*terminal-io*</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#variable-*debug-io*">*debug-io*</a></td><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#variable-*trace-output*">*trace-output*</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#variable-*debugger-hook*">*debugger-hook*</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-+">+</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-19.xhtml#variable-*default-pathname-defaults*">*default-pathname-defaults*</a></td><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#variable-++">++</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#variable-*error-output*">*error-output*</a></td><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#variable-+++">+++</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="symbol-reference" href="#symbol-*features*">*features*</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function--">-</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-10.xhtml#variable-*gensym-counter*">*gensym-counter*</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-/">/</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-24.xhtml#variable-*load-pathname*">*load-pathname*</a></td><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#variable-//">//</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-24.xhtml#variable-*load-print*">*load-print*</a></td><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#variable-///">///</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-24.xhtml#variable-*load-truename*">*load-truename*</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-/=">/=</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-24.xhtml#variable-*load-verbose*">*load-verbose*</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-1+">1+</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#variable-*macroexpand-hook*">*macroexpand-hook*</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-1-">1-</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-24.xhtml#variable-*modules*">*modules*</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-&lt;">&lt;</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#variable-*package*">*package*</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-&lt;=">&lt;=</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#variable-*print-array*">*print-array*</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-=">=</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#variable-*print-base*">*print-base*</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-&gt;">&gt;</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#variable-*print-case*">*print-case*</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-&gt;=">&gt;=</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-2.xhtml#symbol-*print-circle*">*print-circle*</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#function-abort">abort</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#variable-*print-escape*">*print-escape*</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-abs">abs</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#variable-*print-gensym*">*print-gensym*</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-acons">acons</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#variable-*print-length*">*print-length*</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-acos">acos</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#variable-*print-level*">*print-level*</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-acosh">acosh</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="variable-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#variable-*print-lines*">*print-lines*</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-add-method">add-method</a></td></tr></tbody></table><div class="caption">Symbols in the COMMON-LISP package (part one of twelve).</div></span><br/><br/>
<span class="float" id="figure-Symbols in the COMMON-LISP package (part two of twelve)."><table><tbody><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-adjoin">adjoin</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-atom">atom</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-10.xhtml#function-boundp">boundp</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-adjust-array">adjust-array</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#type-base-char">base-char</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#function-break">break</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-adjustable-array-p">adjustable-array-p</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#type-base-string">base-string</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#type-broadcast-stream">broadcast-stream</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-allocate-instance">allocate-instance</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#type-bignum">bignum</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-broadcast-stream-streams">broadcast-stream-streams</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-alpha-char-p">alpha-char-p</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-bit">bit</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#type-built-in-class">built-in-class</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-alphanumericp">alphanumericp</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-bit-and">bit-and</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-butlast">butlast</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-and">and</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-bit-andc1">bit-andc1</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-byte">byte</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-append">append</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-bit-andc2">bit-andc2</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-byte-position">byte-position</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#function-apply">apply</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-bit-eqv">bit-eqv</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-byte-size">byte-size</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-apropos">apropos</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-bit-ior">bit-ior</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-caaaar">caaaar</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-apropos-list">apropos-list</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-bit-nand">bit-nand</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-caaadr">caaadr</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-aref">aref</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-bit-nor">bit-nor</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-caaar">caaar</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#type-arithmetic-error">arithmetic-error</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-bit-not">bit-not</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-caadar">caadar</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-arithmetic-error-operands">arithmetic-error-operands</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-bit-orc1">bit-orc1</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-caaddr">caaddr</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-arithmetic-error-operation">arithmetic-error-operation</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-bit-orc2">bit-orc2</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-caadr">caadr</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-2.xhtml#symbol-array">array</a></td><td><a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-2.xhtml#symbol-bit-vector">bit-vector</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-caar">caar</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-array-dimension">array-dimension</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-bit-vector-p">bit-vector-p</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-cadaar">cadaar</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#constant-array-dimension-limit">array-dimension-limit</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-bit-xor">bit-xor</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-cadadr">cadadr</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-array-dimensions">array-dimensions</a></td><td><a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#special-operator-block">block</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-cadar">cadar</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-array-displacement">array-displacement</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-boole">boole</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-caddar">caddar</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-array-element-type">array-element-type</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-boole-1">boole-1</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-cadddr">cadddr</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-array-has-fill-pointer-p">array-has-fill-pointer-p</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-boole-2">boole-2</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-caddr">caddr</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-array-in-bounds-p">array-in-bounds-p</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-boole-and">boole-and</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-cadr">cadr</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-array-rank">array-rank</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-boole-andc1">boole-andc1</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#constant-call-arguments-limit">call-arguments-limit</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#constant-array-rank-limit">array-rank-limit</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-boole-andc2">boole-andc2</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#macro-call-method">call-method</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-array-row-major-index">array-row-major-index</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-boole-c1">boole-c1</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-call-next-method">call-next-method</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-array-total-size">array-total-size</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-boole-c2">boole-c2</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-car">car</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#constant-array-total-size-limit">array-total-size-limit</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-boole-clr">boole-clr</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-case">case</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-arrayp">arrayp</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-boole-eqv">boole-eqv</a></td><td><a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#special-operator-catch">catch</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-ash">ash</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-boole-ior">boole-ior</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-ccase">ccase</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-asin">asin</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-boole-nand">boole-nand</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-cdaaar">cdaaar</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-asinh">asinh</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-boole-nor">boole-nor</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-cdaadr">cdaadr</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#macro-assert">assert</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-boole-orc1">boole-orc1</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-cdaar">cdaar</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-assoc">assoc</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-boole-orc2">boole-orc2</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-cdadar">cdadar</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-assoc-if">assoc-if</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-boole-set">boole-set</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-cdaddr">cdaddr</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-assoc-if-not">assoc-if-not</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-boole-xor">boole-xor</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-cdadr">cdadr</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-atan">atan</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#type-boolean">boolean</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-cdar">cdar</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-atanh">atanh</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-both-case-p">both-case-p</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-cddaar">cddaar</a></td></tr></tbody></table><div class="caption">Symbols in the COMMON-LISP package (part two of twelve).</div></span><br/><br/>
<span class="float" id="figure-Symbols in the COMMON-LISP package (part three of twelve)."><table><tbody><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-cddadr">cddadr</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-clear-input">clear-input</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-copy-tree">copy-tree</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-cddar">cddar</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-clear-output">clear-output</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-cos">cos</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-cdddar">cdddar</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-close">close</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-cosh">cosh</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-cddddr">cddddr</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-18.xhtml#function-clrhash">clrhash</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-count">count</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-cdddr">cdddr</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-code-char">code-char</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-count-if">count-if</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-cddr">cddr</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#function-coerce">coerce</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-count-if-not">count-if-not</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-cdr">cdr</a></td><td><a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#symbol-compilation-speed">compilation-speed</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-ctypecase">ctypecase</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-ceiling">ceiling</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#function-compile">compile</a></td><td><a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#symbol-debug">debug</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#type-cell-error">cell-error</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-24.xhtml#function-compile-file">compile-file</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#macro-decf">decf</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#function-cell-error-name">cell-error-name</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-24.xhtml#function-compile-file-pathname">compile-file-pathname</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#macro-declaim">declaim</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#function-cerror">cerror</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#type-compiled-function">compiled-function</a></td><td><a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#symbol-declaration">declaration</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-change-class">change-class</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#function-compiled-function-p">compiled-function-p</a></td><td><a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#symbol-declare">declare</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-char">char</a></td><td><a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#symbol-compiler-macro">compiler-macro</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-decode-float">decode-float</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-char-code">char-code</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#function-compiler-macro-function">compiler-macro-function</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-decode-universal-time">decode-universal-time</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#constant-char-code-limit">char-code-limit</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#function-complement">complement</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#macro-defclass">defclass</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-char-downcase">char-downcase</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-complex">complex</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-defconstant">defconstant</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-char-equal">char-equal</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-complexp">complexp</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#macro-defgeneric">defgeneric</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-char-greaterp">char-greaterp</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-compute-applicable-methods">compute-applicable-methods</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#macro-define-compiler-macro">define-compiler-macro</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-char-int">char-int</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#function-compute-restarts">compute-restarts</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#macro-define-condition">define-condition</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-char-lessp">char-lessp</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-concatenate">concatenate</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#macro-define-method-combination">define-method-combination</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-char-name">char-name</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#type-concatenated-stream">concatenated-stream</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-define-modify-macro">define-modify-macro</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-char-not-equal">char-not-equal</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-concatenated-stream-streams">concatenated-stream-streams</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-define-setf-expander">define-setf-expander</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-char-not-greaterp">char-not-greaterp</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-cond">cond</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#macro-define-symbol-macro">define-symbol-macro</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-char-not-lessp">char-not-lessp</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#type-condition">condition</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#macro-defmacro">defmacro</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-char-upcase">char-upcase</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-conjugate">conjugate</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#macro-defmethod">defmethod</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-char/=">char/=</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-cons">cons</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#macro-defpackage">defpackage</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-char&lt;">char&lt;</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-consp">consp</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-defparameter">defparameter</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-char&lt;=">char&lt;=</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#function-constantly">constantly</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-defsetf">defsetf</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-char=">char=</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#function-constantp">constantp</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-8.xhtml#macro-defstruct">defstruct</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-char&gt;">char&gt;</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#function-continue">continue</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#macro-deftype">deftype</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-char&gt;=">char&gt;=</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#type-control-error">control-error</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-defun">defun</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-character">character</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-copy-alist">copy-alist</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-defvar">defvar</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-characterp">characterp</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-copy-list">copy-list</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-delete">delete</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#macro-check-type">check-type</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#function-copy-pprint-dispatch">copy-pprint-dispatch</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-delete-duplicates">delete-duplicates</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-cis">cis</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-23.xhtml#function-copy-readtable">copy-readtable</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-20.xhtml#function-delete-file">delete-file</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#type-class">class</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-copy-seq">copy-seq</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-delete-if">delete-if</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-class-name">class-name</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-8.xhtml#function-copy-structure">copy-structure</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-delete-if-not">delete-if-not</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-class-of">class-of</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-10.xhtml#function-copy-symbol">copy-symbol</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#function-delete-package">delete-package</a></td></tr></tbody></table><div class="caption">Symbols in the COMMON-LISP package (part three of twelve).</div></span><br/><br/>
<span class="float" id="figure-Symbols in the COMMON-LISP package (part four of twelve)."><table><tbody><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-denominator">denominator</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#function-eq">eq</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-deposit-field">deposit-field</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#function-eql">eql</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-describe">describe</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#function-equal">equal</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-describe-object">describe-object</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#function-equalp">equalp</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-destructuring-bind">destructuring-bind</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#function-error">error</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-digit-char">digit-char</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-etypecase">etypecase</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-digit-char-p">digit-char-p</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#function-eval">eval</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-20.xhtml#function-directory">directory</a></td><td><a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#special-operator-eval-when">eval-when</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-19.xhtml#function-directory-namestring">directory-namestring</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-evenp">evenp</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-disassemble">disassemble</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#function-every">every</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#type-division-by-zero">division-by-zero</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-exp">exp</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-6.xhtml#macro-do">do</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#function-export">export</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-6.xhtml#macro-do*">do*</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-expt">expt</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#macro-do-all-symbols">do-all-symbols</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#type-extended-char">extended-char</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#macro-do-external-symbols">do-external-symbols</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#function-fboundp">fboundp</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#macro-do-symbols">do-symbols</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-fceiling">fceiling</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-documentation">documentation</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#function-fdefinition">fdefinition</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-6.xhtml#macro-dolist">dolist</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-ffloor">ffloor</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-6.xhtml#macro-dotimes">dotimes</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-fifth">fifth</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#type-double-float">double-float</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-20.xhtml#function-file-author">file-author</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-double-float-epsilon">double-float-epsilon</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-20.xhtml#type-file-error">file-error</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-double-float-negative-epsilon">double-float-negative-epsilon</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-20.xhtml#function-file-error-pathname">file-error-pathname</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-dpb">dpb</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-file-length">file-length</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-dribble">dribble</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-19.xhtml#function-file-namestring">file-namestring</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="declaration-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#declaration-dynamic-extent">dynamic-extent</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-file-position">file-position</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-ecase">ecase</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#type-file-stream">file-stream</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#type-echo-stream">echo-stream</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-file-string-length">file-string-length</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-echo-stream-input-stream">echo-stream-input-stream</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-20.xhtml#function-file-write-date">file-write-date</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-echo-stream-output-stream">echo-stream-output-stream</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-fill">fill</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-ed">ed</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-fill-pointer">fill-pointer</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-eighth">eighth</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-find">find</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-elt">elt</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#function-find-all-symbols">find-all-symbols</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-encode-universal-time">encode-universal-time</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-find-class">find-class</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#type-end-of-file">end-of-file</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-find-if">find-if</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-endp">endp</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-find-if-not">find-if-not</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-19.xhtml#function-enough-namestring">enough-namestring</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-find-method">find-method</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-20.xhtml#function-ensure-directories-exist">ensure-directories-exist</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#function-find-package">find-package</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-ensure-generic-function">ensure-generic-function</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#function-find-restart">find-restart</a></td></tr></tbody></table><div class="caption">Symbols in the COMMON-LISP package (part four of twelve).</div></span><br/><br/>
<span class="float" id="figure-Symbols in the COMMON-LISP package (part five of twelve)."><table><tbody><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#function-find-symbol">find-symbol</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-get-internal-run-time">get-internal-run-time</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-finish-output">finish-output</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-23.xhtml#function-get-macro-character">get-macro-character</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-first">first</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-get-output-stream-string">get-output-stream-string</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#type-fixnum">fixnum</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-get-properties">get-properties</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#special-operator-flet">flet</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#function-get-setf-expansion">get-setf-expansion</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-float">float</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-get-universal-time">get-universal-time</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-float-digits">float-digits</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-getf">getf</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-float-precision">float-precision</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-18.xhtml#function-gethash">gethash</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-float-radix">float-radix</a></td><td><a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#special-operator-go">go</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-float-sign">float-sign</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-graphic-char-p">graphic-char-p</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#type-floating-point-inexact">floating-point-inexact</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#macro-handler-bind">handler-bind</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#type-floating-point-invalid-operation">floating-point-invalid-operation</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#macro-handler-case">handler-case</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#type-floating-point-overflow">floating-point-overflow</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-18.xhtml#type-hash-table">hash-table</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#type-floating-point-underflow">floating-point-underflow</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-18.xhtml#function-hash-table-count">hash-table-count</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-floatp">floatp</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-18.xhtml#function-hash-table-p">hash-table-p</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-floor">floor</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-18.xhtml#function-hash-table-rehash-size">hash-table-rehash-size</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#function-fmakunbound">fmakunbound</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-18.xhtml#function-hash-table-rehash-threshold">hash-table-rehash-threshold</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-force-output">force-output</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-18.xhtml#function-hash-table-size">hash-table-size</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#function-format">format</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-18.xhtml#function-hash-table-test">hash-table-test</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#macro-formatter">formatter</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-19.xhtml#function-host-namestring">host-namestring</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-fourth">fourth</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#function-identity">identity</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-fresh-line">fresh-line</a></td><td><a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#special-operator-if">if</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-fround">fround</a></td><td><a class="declaration-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#declaration-ignorable">ignorable</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-ftruncate">ftruncate</a></td><td><a class="declaration-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#declaration-ignore">ignore</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="declaration-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#declaration-ftype">ftype</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#macro-ignore-errors">ignore-errors</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#function-funcall">funcall</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-imagpart">imagpart</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#special-operator-function">function</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#function-import">import</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-function-keywords">function-keywords</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#macro-in-package">in-package</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#function-function-lambda-expression">function-lambda-expression</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#macro-incf">incf</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#function-functionp">functionp</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-initialize-instance">initialize-instance</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-gcd">gcd</a></td><td><a class="declaration-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#declaration-inline">inline</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#type-generic-function">generic-function</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-input-stream-p">input-stream-p</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-10.xhtml#function-gensym">gensym</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-inspect">inspect</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-10.xhtml#function-gentemp">gentemp</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#type-integer">integer</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-10.xhtml#function-get">get</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-integer-decode-float">integer-decode-float</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-get-decoded-time">get-decoded-time</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-integer-length">integer-length</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-23.xhtml#function-get-dispatch-macro-character">get-dispatch-macro-character</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-integerp">integerp</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-get-internal-real-time">get-internal-real-time</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-interactive-stream-p">interactive-stream-p</a></td></tr></tbody></table><div class="caption">Symbols in the COMMON-LISP package (part five of twelve).</div></span><br/><br/>
<span class="float" id="figure-Symbols in the COMMON-LISP package (part six of twelve)."><table><tbody><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#function-intern">intern</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-lisp-implementation-type">lisp-implementation-type</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#constant-internal-time-units-per-second">internal-time-units-per-second</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-lisp-implementation-version">lisp-implementation-version</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-intersection">intersection</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-list">list</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#function-invalid-method-error">invalid-method-error</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-list*">list*</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#function-invoke-debugger">invoke-debugger</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#function-list-all-packages">list-all-packages</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#function-invoke-restart">invoke-restart</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-list-length">list-length</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#function-invoke-restart-interactively">invoke-restart-interactively</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-listen">listen</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-isqrt">isqrt</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-listp">listp</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-10.xhtml#type-keyword">keyword</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-24.xhtml#function-load">load</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-10.xhtml#function-keywordp">keywordp</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-19.xhtml#function-load-logical-pathname-translations">load-logical-pathname-translations</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#special-operator-labels">labels</a></td><td><a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#special-operator-load-time-value">load-time-value</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#macro-lambda">lambda</a></td><td><a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#special-operator-locally">locally</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#constant-lambda-list-keywords">lambda-list-keywords</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-log">log</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#constant-lambda-parameters-limit">lambda-parameters-limit</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-logand">logand</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-last">last</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-logandc1">logandc1</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-lcm">lcm</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-logandc2">logandc2</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-ldb">ldb</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-logbitp">logbitp</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-ldb-test">ldb-test</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-logcount">logcount</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-ldiff">ldiff</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-logeqv">logeqv</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-least-negative-double-float">least-negative-double-float</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-19.xhtml#function-logical-pathname">logical-pathname</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-least-negative-long-float">least-negative-long-float</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-19.xhtml#function-logical-pathname-translations">logical-pathname-translations</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-least-negative-normalized-double-float">least-negative-normalized-double-float</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-logior">logior</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-least-negative-normalized-long-float">least-negative-normalized-long-float</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-lognand">lognand</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-least-negative-normalized-short-float">least-negative-normalized-short-float</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-lognor">lognor</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-least-negative-normalized-single-float">least-negative-normalized-single-float</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-lognot">lognot</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-least-negative-short-float">least-negative-short-float</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-logorc1">logorc1</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-least-negative-single-float">least-negative-single-float</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-logorc2">logorc2</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-least-positive-double-float">least-positive-double-float</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-logtest">logtest</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-least-positive-long-float">least-positive-long-float</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-logxor">logxor</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-least-positive-normalized-double-float">least-positive-normalized-double-float</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#type-long-float">long-float</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-least-positive-normalized-long-float">least-positive-normalized-long-float</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-long-float-epsilon">long-float-epsilon</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-least-positive-normalized-short-float">least-positive-normalized-short-float</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-long-float-negative-epsilon">long-float-negative-epsilon</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-least-positive-normalized-single-float">least-positive-normalized-single-float</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-long-site-name">long-site-name</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-least-positive-short-float">least-positive-short-float</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-6.xhtml#macro-loop">loop</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-least-positive-single-float">least-positive-single-float</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-6.xhtml#macro-loop-finish">loop-finish</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-length">length</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-lower-case-p">lower-case-p</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#special-operator-let">let</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-machine-instance">machine-instance</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#special-operator-let*">let*</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-machine-type">machine-type</a></td></tr></tbody></table><div class="caption">Symbols in the COMMON-LISP package (part six of twelve).</div></span><br/><br/>
<span class="float" id="figure-Symbols in the COMMON-LISP package (part seven of twelve)."><table><tbody><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-machine-version">machine-version</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-mask-field">mask-field</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#function-macro-function">macro-function</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-max">max</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#function-macroexpand">macroexpand</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-member">member</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#function-macroexpand-1">macroexpand-1</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-member-if">member-if</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#special-operator-macrolet">macrolet</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-member-if-not">member-if-not</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-make-array">make-array</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-merge">merge</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-make-broadcast-stream">make-broadcast-stream</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-19.xhtml#function-merge-pathnames">merge-pathnames</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-make-concatenated-stream">make-concatenated-stream</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#type-method">method</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#function-make-condition">make-condition</a></td><td><a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#symbol-method-combination">method-combination</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-23.xhtml#function-make-dispatch-macro-character">make-dispatch-macro-character</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#function-method-combination-error">method-combination-error</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-make-echo-stream">make-echo-stream</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-method-qualifiers">method-qualifiers</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-18.xhtml#function-make-hash-table">make-hash-table</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-min">min</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-make-instance">make-instance</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-minusp">minusp</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-make-instances-obsolete">make-instances-obsolete</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-mismatch">mismatch</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-make-list">make-list</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-mod">mod</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-make-load-form">make-load-form</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-most-negative-double-float">most-negative-double-float</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-make-load-form-saving-slots">make-load-form-saving-slots</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-most-negative-fixnum">most-negative-fixnum</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#macro-make-method">make-method</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-most-negative-long-float">most-negative-long-float</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#function-make-package">make-package</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-most-negative-short-float">most-negative-short-float</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-19.xhtml#function-make-pathname">make-pathname</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-most-negative-single-float">most-negative-single-float</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-make-random-state">make-random-state</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-most-positive-double-float">most-positive-double-float</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-make-sequence">make-sequence</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-most-positive-fixnum">most-positive-fixnum</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-make-string">make-string</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-most-positive-long-float">most-positive-long-float</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-make-string-input-stream">make-string-input-stream</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-most-positive-short-float">most-positive-short-float</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-make-string-output-stream">make-string-output-stream</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-most-positive-single-float">most-positive-single-float</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-10.xhtml#function-make-symbol">make-symbol</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#function-muffle-warning">muffle-warning</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-make-synonym-stream">make-synonym-stream</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-multiple-value-bind">multiple-value-bind</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-make-two-way-stream">make-two-way-stream</a></td><td><a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#special-operator-multiple-value-call">multiple-value-call</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-10.xhtml#function-makunbound">makunbound</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-multiple-value-list">multiple-value-list</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-map">map</a></td><td><a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#special-operator-multiple-value-prog1">multiple-value-prog1</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-map-into">map-into</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-multiple-value-setq">multiple-value-setq</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-mapc">mapc</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#constant-multiple-values-limit">multiple-values-limit</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-mapcan">mapcan</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-name-char">name-char</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-mapcar">mapcar</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-19.xhtml#function-namestring">namestring</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-mapcon">mapcon</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-nbutlast">nbutlast</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-18.xhtml#function-maphash">maphash</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-nconc">nconc</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-mapl">mapl</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-next-method-p">next-method-p</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-maplist">maplist</a></td><td><a class="section-reference" href="#section-NIL">NIL</a></td></tr></tbody></table><div class="caption">Symbols in the COMMON-LISP package (part seven of twelve).</div></span><br/><br/>
<span class="float" id="figure-Symbols in the COMMON-LISP package (part eight of twelve)."><table><tbody><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-nintersection">nintersection</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#type-package-error">package-error</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-ninth">ninth</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#function-package-error-package">package-error-package</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-no-applicable-method">no-applicable-method</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#function-package-name">package-name</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-no-next-method">no-next-method</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#function-package-nicknames">package-nicknames</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#function-not">not</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#function-package-shadowing-symbols">package-shadowing-symbols</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#function-notany">notany</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#function-package-use-list">package-use-list</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#function-notevery">notevery</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#function-package-used-by-list">package-used-by-list</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#symbol-notinline">notinline</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#function-packagep">packagep</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-nreconc">nreconc</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-pairlis">pairlis</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-nreverse">nreverse</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#type-parse-error">parse-error</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-nset-difference">nset-difference</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-parse-integer">parse-integer</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-nset-exclusive-or">nset-exclusive-or</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-19.xhtml#function-parse-namestring">parse-namestring</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-nstring-capitalize">nstring-capitalize</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-19.xhtml#function-pathname">pathname</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-nstring-downcase">nstring-downcase</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-19.xhtml#function-pathname-device">pathname-device</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-nstring-upcase">nstring-upcase</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-19.xhtml#function-pathname-directory">pathname-directory</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-nsublis">nsublis</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-19.xhtml#function-pathname-host">pathname-host</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-nsubst">nsubst</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-19.xhtml#function-pathname-match-p">pathname-match-p</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-nsubst-if">nsubst-if</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-19.xhtml#function-pathname-name">pathname-name</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-nsubst-if-not">nsubst-if-not</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-19.xhtml#function-pathname-type">pathname-type</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-nsubstitute">nsubstitute</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-19.xhtml#function-pathname-version">pathname-version</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-nsubstitute-if">nsubstitute-if</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-19.xhtml#function-pathnamep">pathnamep</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-nsubstitute-if-not">nsubstitute-if-not</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-peek-char">peek-char</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-nth">nth</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-phase">phase</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-nth-value">nth-value</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-pi">pi</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-nthcdr">nthcdr</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-plusp">plusp</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-null">null</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#macro-pop">pop</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#type-number">number</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-position">position</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-numberp">numberp</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-position-if">position-if</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-numerator">numerator</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-position-if-not">position-if-not</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-nunion">nunion</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#function-pprint">pprint</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-oddp">oddp</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#function-pprint-dispatch">pprint-dispatch</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-open">open</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#macro-pprint-exit-if-list-exhausted">pprint-exit-if-list-exhausted</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-open-stream-p">open-stream-p</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#function-pprint-fill">pprint-fill</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="declaration-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#declaration-optimize">optimize</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#function-pprint-indent">pprint-indent</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-or">or</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#function-pprint-linear">pprint-linear</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#symbol-otherwise">otherwise</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#macro-pprint-logical-block">pprint-logical-block</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-output-stream-p">output-stream-p</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#function-pprint-newline">pprint-newline</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#type-package">package</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#macro-pprint-pop">pprint-pop</a></td></tr></tbody></table><div class="caption">Symbols in the COMMON-LISP package (part eight of twelve).</div></span><br/><br/>
<span class="float" id="figure-Symbols in the COMMON-LISP package (part nine of twelve)."><table><tbody><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#function-pprint-tab">pprint-tab</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-read-char">read-char</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#function-pprint-tabular">pprint-tabular</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-read-char-no-hang">read-char-no-hang</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#function-prin1">prin1</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-23.xhtml#function-read-delimited-list">read-delimited-list</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#function-prin1-to-string">prin1-to-string</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-23.xhtml#function-read-from-string">read-from-string</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#function-princ">princ</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-read-line">read-line</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#function-princ-to-string">princ-to-string</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-23.xhtml#function-read-preserving-whitespace">read-preserving-whitespace</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#function-print">print</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-read-sequence">read-sequence</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#type-print-not-readable">print-not-readable</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-23.xhtml#type-reader-error">reader-error</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#function-print-not-readable-object">print-not-readable-object</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-23.xhtml#type-readtable">readtable</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#function-print-object">print-object</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-23.xhtml#function-readtable-case">readtable-case</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#macro-print-unreadable-object">print-unreadable-object</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-23.xhtml#function-readtablep">readtablep</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-20.xhtml#function-probe-file">probe-file</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#type-real">real</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#function-proclaim">proclaim</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-realp">realp</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-prog">prog</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-realpart">realpart</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-prog*">prog*</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-reduce">reduce</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-prog1">prog1</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-reinitialize-instance">reinitialize-instance</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-prog2">prog2</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-rem">rem</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#special-operator-progn">progn</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#macro-remf">remf</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#type-program-error">program-error</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-18.xhtml#function-remhash">remhash</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#special-operator-progv">progv</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-remove">remove</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-24.xhtml#function-provide">provide</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-remove-duplicates">remove-duplicates</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-psetf">psetf</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-remove-if">remove-if</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-psetq">psetq</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-remove-if-not">remove-if-not</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#macro-push">push</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-remove-method">remove-method</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#macro-pushnew">pushnew</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-10.xhtml#function-remprop">remprop</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#special-operator-quote">quote</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-20.xhtml#function-rename-file">rename-file</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-random">random</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#function-rename-package">rename-package</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#type-random-state">random-state</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-replace">replace</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-random-state-p">random-state-p</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-24.xhtml#function-require">require</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-rassoc">rassoc</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-rest">rest</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-rassoc-if">rassoc-if</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#type-restart">restart</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-rassoc-if-not">rassoc-if-not</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#macro-restart-bind">restart-bind</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#symbol-ratio">ratio</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#macro-restart-case">restart-case</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-rational">rational</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#function-restart-name">restart-name</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-rationalize">rationalize</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-return">return</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-rationalp">rationalp</a></td><td><a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#special-operator-return-from">return-from</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-23.xhtml#function-read">read</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-revappend">revappend</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-read-byte">read-byte</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-reverse">reverse</a></td></tr></tbody></table><div class="caption">Symbols in the COMMON-LISP package (part nine of twelve).</div></span><br/><br/>
<span class="float" id="figure-Symbols in the COMMON-LISP package (part ten of twelve)."><table><tbody><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-room">room</a></td><td><a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-2.xhtml#symbol-simple-bit-vector">simple-bit-vector</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-rotatef">rotatef</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-simple-bit-vector-p">simple-bit-vector-p</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-round">round</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#type-simple-condition">simple-condition</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-row-major-aref">row-major-aref</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#function-simple-condition-format-arguments">simple-condition-format-arguments</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-rplaca">rplaca</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#function-simple-condition-format-control">simple-condition-format-control</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-rplacd">rplacd</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#type-simple-error">simple-error</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#symbol-safety">safety</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#type-simple-string">simple-string</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#type-satisfies">satisfies</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-simple-string-p">simple-string-p</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-sbit">sbit</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#type-simple-type-error">simple-type-error</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-scale-float">scale-float</a></td><td><a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-2.xhtml#symbol-simple-vector">simple-vector</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-schar">schar</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-simple-vector-p">simple-vector-p</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-search">search</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#type-simple-warning">simple-warning</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-second">second</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-sin">sin</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#type-sequence">sequence</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#type-single-float">single-float</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#type-serious-condition">serious-condition</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-single-float-epsilon">single-float-epsilon</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-10.xhtml#function-set">set</a></td><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-single-float-negative-epsilon">single-float-negative-epsilon</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-set-difference">set-difference</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-sinh">sinh</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-23.xhtml#function-set-dispatch-macro-character">set-dispatch-macro-character</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-sixth">sixth</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-set-exclusive-or">set-exclusive-or</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-sleep">sleep</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-23.xhtml#function-set-macro-character">set-macro-character</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-slot-boundp">slot-boundp</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#function-set-pprint-dispatch">set-pprint-dispatch</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-slot-exists-p">slot-exists-p</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-23.xhtml#function-set-syntax-from-char">set-syntax-from-char</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-slot-makunbound">slot-makunbound</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-setf">setf</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-slot-missing">slot-missing</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#special-operator-setq">setq</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-slot-unbound">slot-unbound</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-seventh">seventh</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-slot-value">slot-value</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#function-shadow">shadow</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-software-type">software-type</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#function-shadowing-import">shadowing-import</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-software-version">software-version</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-shared-initialize">shared-initialize</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#function-some">some</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-shiftf">shiftf</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-sort">sort</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#type-short-float">short-float</a></td><td><a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#symbol-space">space</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-short-float-epsilon">short-float-epsilon</a></td><td><a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#symbol-special">special</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="constant-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#constant-short-float-negative-epsilon">short-float-negative-epsilon</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#function-special-operator-p">special-operator-p</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-short-site-name">short-site-name</a></td><td><a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#symbol-speed">speed</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#function-signal">signal</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-sqrt">sqrt</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#type-signed-byte">signed-byte</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-stable-sort">stable-sort</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-signum">signum</a></td><td><a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#symbol-standard">standard</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#type-simple-array">simple-array</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#type-standard-char">standard-char</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#type-simple-base-string">simple-base-string</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-standard-char-p">standard-char-p</a></td></tr></tbody></table><div class="caption">Symbols in the COMMON-LISP package (part ten of twelve).</div></span><br/><br/>
<span class="float" id="figure-Symbols in the COMMON-LISP package (part eleven of twelve)."><table><tbody><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#type-standard-class">standard-class</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-sublis">sublis</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#type-standard-generic-function">standard-generic-function</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-subseq">subseq</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#type-standard-method">standard-method</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-subsetp">subsetp</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#type-standard-object">standard-object</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-subst">subst</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#macro-step">step</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-subst-if">subst-if</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#type-storage-condition">storage-condition</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-subst-if-not">subst-if-not</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#function-store-value">store-value</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-substitute">substitute</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#type-stream">stream</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-substitute-if">substitute-if</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-stream-element-type">stream-element-type</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-17.xhtml#function-substitute-if-not">substitute-if-not</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#type-stream-error">stream-error</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#function-subtypep">subtypep</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-stream-error-stream">stream-error-stream</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-svref">svref</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-stream-external-format">stream-external-format</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-18.xhtml#function-sxhash">sxhash</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-streamp">streamp</a></td><td><a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-2.xhtml#symbol-symbol">symbol</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-string">string</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-10.xhtml#function-symbol-function">symbol-function</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-string-capitalize">string-capitalize</a></td><td><a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#special-operator-symbol-macrolet">symbol-macrolet</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-string-downcase">string-downcase</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-10.xhtml#function-symbol-name">symbol-name</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-string-equal">string-equal</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-10.xhtml#function-symbol-package">symbol-package</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-string-greaterp">string-greaterp</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-10.xhtml#function-symbol-plist">symbol-plist</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-string-left-trim">string-left-trim</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-10.xhtml#function-symbol-value">symbol-value</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-string-lessp">string-lessp</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-10.xhtml#function-symbolp">symbolp</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-string-not-equal">string-not-equal</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#type-synonym-stream">synonym-stream</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-string-not-greaterp">string-not-greaterp</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-synonym-stream-symbol">synonym-stream-symbol</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-string-not-lessp">string-not-lessp</a></td><td><a class="section-reference" href="chapter-26.xhtml#section-T">T</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-string-right-trim">string-right-trim</a></td><td><a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#special-operator-tagbody">tagbody</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#type-string-stream">string-stream</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-tailp">tailp</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-string-trim">string-trim</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-tan">tan</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-string-upcase">string-upcase</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-tanh">tanh</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-string/=">string/=</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-tenth">tenth</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-string&lt;">string&lt;</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-terpri">terpri</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-string&lt;=">string&lt;=</a></td><td><a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-3.xhtml#special-operator-the">the</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-string=">string=</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-third">third</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-string&gt;">string&gt;</a></td><td><a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#special-operator-throw">throw</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-string&gt;=">string&gt;=</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#macro-time">time</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-16.xhtml#function-stringp">stringp</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#macro-trace">trace</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-2.xhtml#symbol-structure">structure</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-19.xhtml#function-translate-logical-pathname">translate-logical-pathname</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#type-structure-class">structure-class</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-19.xhtml#function-translate-pathname">translate-pathname</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#type-structure-object">structure-object</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-tree-equal">tree-equal</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#type-style-warning">style-warning</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-20.xhtml#function-truename">truename</a></td></tr></tbody></table><div class="caption">Symbols in the COMMON-LISP package (part eleven of twelve).</div></span><br/><br/>
<span class="float" id="figure-Symbols in the COMMON-LISP package (part twelve of twelve)."><table><tbody><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-truncate">truncate</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#function-values-list">values-list</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#type-two-way-stream">two-way-stream</a></td><td><a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#symbol-variable">variable</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-two-way-stream-input-stream">two-way-stream-input-stream</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-vector">vector</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-two-way-stream-output-stream">two-way-stream-output-stream</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-vector-pop">vector-pop</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="symbol-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#symbol-type">type</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-vector-push">vector-push</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#type-type-error">type-error</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-vector-push-extend">vector-push-extend</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#function-type-error-datum">type-error-datum</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-vectorp">vectorp</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#function-type-error-expected-type">type-error-expected-type</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#function-warn">warn</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#function-type-of">type-of</a></td><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#type-warning">warning</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-typecase">typecase</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-when">when</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-4.xhtml#function-typep">typep</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-19.xhtml#function-wild-pathname-p">wild-pathname-p</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#type-unbound-slot">unbound-slot</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#macro-with-accessors">with-accessors</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-unbound-slot-instance">unbound-slot-instance</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-24.xhtml#macro-with-compilation-unit">with-compilation-unit</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-10.xhtml#type-unbound-variable">unbound-variable</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#macro-with-condition-restarts">with-condition-restarts</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#type-undefined-function">undefined-function</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-18.xhtml#macro-with-hash-table-iterator">with-hash-table-iterator</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#function-unexport">unexport</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#macro-with-input-from-string">with-input-from-string</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#function-unintern">unintern</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#macro-with-open-file">with-open-file</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-14.xhtml#function-union">union</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#macro-with-open-stream">with-open-stream</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#macro-unless">unless</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#macro-with-output-to-string">with-output-to-string</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-unread-char">unread-char</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#macro-with-package-iterator">with-package-iterator</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="type-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#type-unsigned-byte">unsigned-byte</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#macro-with-simple-restart">with-simple-restart</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#macro-untrace">untrace</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#macro-with-slots">with-slots</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#function-unuse-package">unuse-package</a></td><td><a class="macro-reference" href="chapter-23.xhtml#macro-with-standard-io-syntax">with-standard-io-syntax</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="special-operator-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#special-operator-unwind-protect">unwind-protect</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#function-write">write</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-update-instance-for-different-class">update-instance-for-different-class</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-write-byte">write-byte</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-7.xhtml#function-update-instance-for-redefined-class">update-instance-for-redefined-class</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-write-char">write-char</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-15.xhtml#function-upgraded-array-element-type">upgraded-array-element-type</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-write-line">write-line</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-upgraded-complex-part-type">upgraded-complex-part-type</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-write-sequence">write-sequence</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-13.xhtml#function-upper-case-p">upper-case-p</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-write-string">write-string</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-11.xhtml#function-use-package">use-package</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-22.xhtml#function-write-to-string">write-to-string</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-9.xhtml#function-use-value">use-value</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-y-or-n-p">y-or-n-p</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-25.xhtml#function-user-homedir-pathname">user-homedir-pathname</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-21.xhtml#function-yes-or-no-p">yes-or-no-p</a></td></tr><tr><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-5.xhtml#function-values">values</a></td><td><a class="function-reference" href="chapter-12.xhtml#function-zerop">zerop</a></td></tr></tbody></table><div class="caption">Symbols in the COMMON-LISP package (part twelve of twelve).</div></span>

</section></section></div></main><footer>Copyright © 2021 Jan Moringen</footer></body></html>